

===== PAGE 1 =====

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023 7723
A Multimodal Multilevel Converged Attention
Network for Hand Gesture Recognition With
Hybrid sEMG and A-Mode Ultrasound Sensing
Sheng Wei , Yue Zhang, and Honghai Liu , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Gesture recognition based on surface electromyogra- I. INTRODUCTION
phy (sEMG) has been widely used in the field of human–machine THE HAND is the most flexible limb in the human body. It
interaction (HMI). However, sEMG has limitations, such as low
can assist humans in most life behaviors. Hand gestures,
signal-to-noise ratio and insensitivity to fine finger movements,
so we consider adding A-mode ultrasound (AUS) to enhance as an intuitive and convenient human expression, can express a
the recognition impact. To explore the influence of multisource variety of meanings. With the development of human–machine
sensing data on gesture recognition and better integrate the fea- interaction (HMI), HMI methods based on gesture recogni-
tures of different modules. We proposed a multimodal multilevel
tion have gained widespread attention. However, the result of
converged attention network (MMCANet) model for multisource
gesture recognition is strongly affected by the original sig-
signals composed of sEMG and AUS. The proposed model
extracts the hidden features of the AUS signal with a con- nal, so it is especially critical to choose a suitable signal.
volutional neural network (CNN). Meanwhile, a CNN-LSTM The human body carries a large amount of information, and
(long-short memory network) hybrid structure extracts some bio-signals are a great treasure for obtaining the state of the
spatial-temporal features from the sEMG signal. Then, two
human body. With the continuous development of the bio-
types of CNN features from AUS and sEMG are spliced and
signal decoding technology, researchers are extracting and
transmitted to a transformer encoder to fuse the information
and interact with sEMG features to produce hybrid features. analyzing human bio-signals to characterize them as con-
Finally, the classification results are output employing fully con- trol signals to accomplish gesture interaction. The bio-electric
nected layers. Attention mechanisms are used to adjust the signals have received a lot of attention include electromyog-
weights of feature channels. We compared MMCANet’s feature
raphy (EMG) [1], [2], [3], electroencephalography (EEG) [4],
extraction and classification performance with that of manually
electrooculography (EOG) [5], etc. In addition, near-infrared
extracted sEMG-AUS features using four traditional machine-
spectroscopy (NIRS) [6], force myography (FMG) [7], inertial
learning (ML) algorithms. The recognition accuracy increased by
at least 5.15%. In addition, we tried deep learning (DL) methods measurement unit (IMU) [8], and ultrasound (US) sensing [9],
with CNN on single modals. The experimental results showed that etc. They have been used in wearable sensing solutions.
the proposed model improved 14.31% and 3.80% over the CNN The surface EMG (sEMG) signal is the most accessible and
method with single sEMG and AUS, respectively. Compared with
simplest physiological signal, and it is the principal noninva-
some state-of-the-art fusion techniques, our method also achieved
sive method to determine the upper limb bio-electric signals.
better results.
When transmitting the nerve excitation impulse to the mus-
Index Terms—A-mode ultrasound (AUS), attention mecha-
cle, we can obtain the sEMG signals through the surface
nism, gesture recognition, hybrid features, multimodal, surface
electrode guidance and operation of amplification, and it can
electromyography (sEMG), transformer.
reflect the functional change of the neuromuscular system.
Pattern recognition based on sEMG has been widely used in
Manuscript received 2 May 2022; revised 30 June 2022; accepted 29
August 2022. Date of publication 23 September 2022; date of current version HMI [10], [11]. As for the sEMG-based gesture recognition,
22 November 2023. This work was supported in part by the Guangdong Basic the feature extraction of sEMG is essential for the later decod-
and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant 2020B1515120064;
ing, and the commonly used features can divide into three
in part by the Shenzhen Science and Technology Program under Grant
JCYJ20210324120214040; and in part by the National Natural Science categories: 1) time-domain features; 2) frequency-domain fea-
Foundation of China under Grant 61733011 and Grant 62003222. This arti- tures; and 3) time-frequency features [12], and the different
cle was recommended by Associate Editor H. Liu. (Corresponding author:
feature combinations have huge impacts on the results. In [13],
Honghai Liu.)
This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval of the scholars used fused wavelet packets to gain the sEMG
all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by Ethic characteristics and performed better than the conventional
Committee of Zhejiang University of Technology.
counterpart techniques. In [14], researchers used a convolu-
Sheng Wei and Yue Zhang are with the Department of Computer
Science, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 310013, China tion neural network to extract sEMG features, called CNNFeat,
(e-mail: 2112012098@zjut.edu.cn; 1111712013@zjut.edu.cn). and the results showed that the combination of CNNFeats and
Honghai Liu is with the State Key Laboratory of Robotics and Systems,
manual features can further improve the accuracy of traditional
Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518055, China, and
also with the School of Computing, University of Portsmouth, PO1 3HE classifiers.
Portsmouth, U.K. (e-mail: honghai.liu@icloud.com). So far, scholars have achieved significant progress in
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
processing sEMG with advanced methods. However, the
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCYB.2022.3204343.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCYB.2022.3204343 signal characteristics of sEMG determine that it is weak
2168-2267 (cid:2)c 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:00:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 2 =====

7724 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023
and susceptible to interference from noise. To overcome this CNN can extract the characteristics of hierarchy and space
shortcoming, A-mode US (AUS) is introduced as the pio- well [25]. LSTM can make good use of the temporal features
neering study to resolve the decoding effect in [15]. AUS of sequences [26].
is a high-frequency US. It can detect muscle morphology by Therefore, we designed the multimodal multilevel con-
receiving echo signals. It is based on the relationship between verged attention network (MMCANet) to perform feature
time and amplitude of sound waves to detect the echo of extraction and fusion using a deep-learning-based approach to
sound waves, with high axial resolution and positioning accu- enhance feature extraction and exploit the relationship between
racy [16]. AUS can obtain the subtle changes of deep muscles features. In this article, we adopted CNN with LSTM networks
and has enormous advantages over sEMG in recognizing sub- to extract deeper traits and intrinsic connections to multimodal
tle gestures. It is also less likely to be affected by muscle data and find effective ways of multimodal feature fusion.
fatigue and has a better stability. Compared with the B-mode Also, since both AUS and sEMG are multichannel signals,
US, the AUS device is smaller, cheaper, and wearable for stud- we added a channel attention mechanism to adjust channels’
ies on gesture recognition. In [17], a method was proposed to weights. It can better explore the relationship between chan-
obtain forearm muscle information by multiple single-element nels. At the same time, to better integrate the information
AUS sensors, and average recognition accuracy can achieve of different modalities, we chose the more advanced trans-
96% for six movements, including five finger flexion motions former encoder module to extract the fusion traits. We also
and a resting state. Yang et al. [18] implemented the decoding compared our method with concatenating features and two
of synchronized and proportional wrist/hand kinematics using state-of-the-art fusion methods and obtained a higher decoding
AUS and achieved better performance than sEMG. rate.
AUS provides spatial information on muscle morphologies, The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
but lacks temporal information, while sEMG is a time series Section II introduces the methods and basic experimental set-
of electrophysiological signals, which can supplement the tings. Section III describes the results and analysis of different
temporal details for AUS. The sEMG signal acquires the char- groups. The last section gives a conclusion of this study.
acteristics of the human surface only, while AUS can obtain
the distinctions of deep muscles [19]. Therefore, the features II. METHOD AND EXPERIMENT
obtained by fusing AUS and sEMG, which can obtain spatial-
In this article, for single AUS, sEMG, and combined sEMG-
temporal information and traits of superficial and deep muscle
AUS acquisition signals, we use traditional ML methods and
compared with a single modality, can bring better recogni-
DL for feature extraction and classification, respectively. The
tion performance. Yang et al. [20] exploited the advantages
specific experiment setup will show in later sections.
of AUS in gesture recognition and discrete force estima-
tions and then combined them with the strength of sEMG
A. Networks
in continuous force estimation to achieve multilevel scaled
gesture control. Boyd and Liu [21] used AUS signals as a 1) CNN: CNN is a feed-forward neural network, usually
complement to sEMG signals, and it could provide power- consisting of one or more convolution and fully connected
ful improvements in the decoding of fine finger movements layers. The receptive field was introduced into CNN to mimic
and large arm movements. Xia et al. [15] used feature extrac- the pattern the human brain processes information [27]. So,
tion and traditional machine-learning (ML) algorithms for compared to traditional ML methods, CNN can learn and gen-
classification. The data collected by sEMG and AUS syn- erate more hidden features, which is superior to manual feature
chronously showed a significant improvement over a single extraction methods [14].
modality. Zeng et al. [22] proposed a convolutional neu- 2) LSTM: LSTM is a variant of recurrent neural network
ral network (CNN)-based sEMG and AUS feature fusion (RNN), mainly to figure out the gradient disappearance and
architecture (EU-Net), which surpassed the method of the gradient explosion problems during the long sequences train-
ML algorithm with the manual designed features. In [23], ing. It is a kind of neural network containing LSTM blocks,
researchers proposed a regularized deep fusion of kernel and the LSTM block includes forget gate, input gate, and
machine (RDFKM) approach to merge multimodal physiolog- output gate. The forget gate, which is the key to achieving
ical signals. The above study shows that multimodal gesture the long-term memory task, is the most critical part of each
recognition can complement the strength of different modali- LSTM block [28]. The LSTM network can capture the tem-
ties to improve performance [24], and indicates the possibility poral dependence of time series and has achieved a series of
of combining sEMG and AUS. results in time-series prediction [29], [30].
In the previous studies, methods based on traditional man- 3) AlexNet: AlexNet was designed by Hinton. He is the
ual feature extraction and ML have received much attention winner of the 2012 ImageNet competition and his student
and development. Yet, the classic feature extraction and classi- Alex Krizhevsky. Tricks, such as ReLU, Dropout, and Local
fication algorithms are limited in their ability to extract traits Response Normalization were applied in CNN successfully
from the signal, especially in the correlation of multimodal the first time. It has 6000w parameters and 65w neurons and
data is not well exploited. Deep learning (DL) is an algorithm is composed of five convolution pooling layers, followed by
for learning the representation of data, with the advantages three fully connected layers [31].
of learning ability and good adaptability, which can fully 4) DenseNet: DenseNet is the best paper of CVPR2017,
extract the features of the signal. The most widely used which can be regarded as a network of ResNet and
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:00:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 3 =====

WEI et al.: MMCANet FOR HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION 7725
Fig. 1. Structure of transformer encoder.
Fig. 2. Twenty gestures in the dataset [15].
HighwayNet. They introduced shortcuts to reduce gradient
(mRMR) algorithm [38]. Intermediate fusion is converting
disappearance and enhanced information fusion between
different modal data into high-dimensional feature represen-
different layers. It is composed of multiple Dense Blocks in
tations first and then fusing them in the middle layer of the
series [32].
model. Take a neural network as an example. The intermediate
5) SENet: Squeeze-and-excitation networks (SENet) is an
fusion first uses a neural network to transform the origi-
auxiliary network, including two critical operations: 1) squeeze
nal data into a high-dimensional feature representation, then
and 2) excitation. The structure is simple and can insert into
obtains and fuses the traits of different modalities in the high-
other network structures without introducing additional layers
dimensional space. Back-end fusion refers to training and
or functions [33]. The squeeze operation represents the global
classifying individual modal data separately by converging
characteristics of each 2-D feature channel by compressing the
the output scoring of the trained classifiers for each modality.
features along the spatial dimension and characterizing each
The classical methods of back-end fusion include max-fusion,
channel as a number. The excitation procedure is similar to the
averaged-fusion, etc.
gate mechanism in RNNs, generating corresponding weights
for each feature channel, and representing the correlation
between channels. Finally, the significance of each channel B. Dataset
is adjusted by multiplication operation, and the channel focus In this article, the dataset for the experiment contains a syn-
module is implemented to improve the focus on critical fea- chronized sEMG signal and AUS signal, where the sEMG and
ture channels, thereby enhancing the beneficial information AUS data are stored separately and can therefore use inde-
and weakening the invalid information [34]. pendently. In subsequent experiments, the single modal data
6) Transformer Encoder: The transformer structure is com- are from the multimodal signal. The selection of motions in
posed of encoders and decoders. The encoder is divided into this experiment is based on the NinaPro database [39]. The
two modules, the multihead attention layer and the feed- 20 gestures in this dataset were shown in Fig. 2. It includes
forward neural-network layer, as shown in Fig. 1. Further split, six wrist movements: 1) wrist flexion (WF); 2) wrist exten-
the multihead attention layer can be divided into the atten- sion (WE); 3) wrist radial deviation (WRD); 4) wrist ulnar
tion layer and Add & Norm layer. The feed-forward neural deviation (WUD); 5) wrist supination (WS); and 6) wrist
network can be divided into the Linear layer and Add & pronation (WP); 13 finger fine movements: 1) fist (FS);
Norm layer. In the multihead attention layer, the core lies in 2) index point (IP); 3) index and middle finger point (IMP);
three Query (Q)/Key (K)/Value (V) matrices, in which the 4) thumb and index finger flexion (TIF); 5) thumb flex-
Q/K matrix generates a weight matrix (via softmax), then the ion (TF); 6) fingers abduction (FA); 7) thumb up (TU);
sum of the weight matrix and the V matrix is weighted, and 8) index flexion (IF); 9) middle finger flexion (MF); 10) index
achieve the effect of self-attention [35]. Because of its self- and MF (IMF); 11) middle and ring finger flexion (MRF);
attention mechanism and powerful coding ability, it can fuse 12) ring and little finger flexion (RLF); and 13) pinch (PH)
information from different modules [36]. and a rest state (RS).
7) Multimodal Fusion: In multimodal tasks, how effi- The experimental data are acquired by a four-channel sEMG
ciently fusing multiple features from various modalities is the and AUS fusion device (Elonxi Ltd, www.elonxi.cn), as shown
key to improving model performance. Generally, the fusion in Fig. 3. The device consists of four-unit modules with one
methods of multimodal features are categorized into three AUS probe and two sEMG electrodes fixed on each module,
types: 1) front-end fusion; 2) intermediate fusion; and 3) back- and it can obtain both sEMG and AUS signals from the same
end fusion [37]. Front-end fusion is the fusion of data from area. The sampling frequency of the sEMG signal is 1000 Hz,
multiple modalities into a single feature vector before sub- the AUS sampling frequency is 10 Hz, and each frame of the
sequent operations. Multimodal front-end fusion methods are AUS signal has 1000 sampling points.
often combined with feature extraction methods to eliminate Eight subjects (age: 22 ± 3, height: 175 ± 10 cm, weight:
redundant information, such as principal component analy- 65 ± 10 kg) volunteered in the experiment. They are right-
sis (PCA) and the maximum relevance minimum redundancy handed and free of neuropathies or traumas to the upper limbs.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:00:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 4 =====

7726 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023
Fig. 5. Structure of AUS CNN network.
TABLE I
AUS-CNN ARCHITECTURES
Fig. 3. Picture of the sEMG and AUS fusion device.
a band-pass filter for noise reduction for the sEMG signal. To
ensure the synchronization with the AUS signal, the window
size of the data is 300 ms for the noise reduction signal, and
the step size is 100 ms so that the sampling frequency of the
sEMG signal is consistent with the AUS signal at 10 Hz, and
Fig. 4. Position of the probes. the normalization operation is employed.
D. Experiment Setup
The AUS/sEMG probes were worn on the dominant hand
To test and verify the proposed network structure with
(an appropriate amount of coupling agent should apply to the
sEMG, AUS, and fusion signals. We designed different
AUS probe in advance). We placed the armband on the fore-
network models for the three datasets in this article. For all the
arm of the subject. Before that, we should clean the subjects’
networks, the batch size was 50. The early stopping method
skin with alcohol pads where the probes will place. Two of
would stop training when the training loss no longer decreases.
the probes were attached to the ulnar carpal flexor and ulnar
The specific setup of the experiments will show in later sec-
carpal extensor muscles. While the other two were attached
tions. For the datasets, the first four out of eight trials for
to the radial carpal flexor and radial carpal flexor muscles, as
each subject were the training set, and the data from the last
shown in Fig. 4. The experiment was carried out following
four trials were the test set. The network weight initialization
the Declaration of Helsinki. In the experiment, the duration
method was random initialization. The experiments were per-
of each motion is 5 s, with no rest interval between changes.
formed on i5-11400F CPU, 2.60 GHz, 32-GB RAM, and an
Subjects were free to rest for 25-s after the completion of all
NVIDIA Geforce GTX 3060 GPU-supported PC.
20 types of actions. The above process was completed once
In all figures of the network structure, the first number
and called one action group. The experiment was repeated
before @ means the channel number of this layer, and a × b
for eight groups. For each gesture action, the middle 3 s of
means the width and height in the layer. The ConvX in the
the steady-state were picked as the experimental data, and the
figure stands for the ConvBlock, the structure of a ConvBlock
number of 20 types of gestures in the database was balanced.
was shown in Fig. 5. In this table, in and out are in_channel
and out_channel, k, s, and p means kernel_size, padding, and
C. Data Preprocessing
stride. In all the tables of network parameters, the activation
The preprocessing process for AUS signals includes time function of the convolutional layer is ReLU.
gain compensation (TGC), Gaussian filtering, envelope extrac- 1) AUS CNN Network: For individual AUS signals, we
tion, and log compression [40]. The TGC was utilized to used one frame of data from four channels as a sample, then
compensate for the energy attenuation caused by dispersion transformed each frame into a shape of 100 × 10 to obtain a
and damping during the propagation of AUS. In band-pass data size of 4 × 100 × 10 for each sample to feed into the
filtering, we used a Gaussian filter with the center frequency network for training. The network structure consists of five
positioned at the center of the passband, and it can filter out the layers, as shown in Fig. 5. The AUS-CNN architectures are in
nonlinear propagation and the noise in the circuit. The Hilbert Table I. Adam was the optimizer, and the initial learning rate
transform was used to perform envelope extraction. The log was 0.001.
compression compressed the large dynamic range caused by 2) sEMG CNN-LSTM Network: For the sEMG signal,
TGC into a smaller space for subsequent processing. We use since the data quantity for each sample was much smaller than
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:00:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 5 =====

WEI et al.: MMCANet FOR HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION 7727
TABLE II
SEMG-CNN-LSTM ARCHITECTURES
Fig. 6. Structure of sEMG CNN-LSTM network.
TABLE III
ALEXNET ARCHITECTURES
(a) (b)
TABLE IV
DENSENET ARCHITECTURES
Fig. 7. Time-frequency diagrams of two adjacent. (a) sEMG and (b) AUS
signal samples.
Fig. 8. Multimodal fusion structure of RDFKM.
that of AUS, we stitched the data of four channels together
and converted it into a shape of 300 × 4. Then the data was
sent to the network for training. The entire network consisted
of seven layers, as shown in Fig. 6, and the parameters of signal samples are shown in Fig. 7. The network structure
the sEMG CNN-LSTM Network are shown in Table II. The parameters are shown in Tables III and IV.
optimizer was Adam, and the initial learning rate was 0.01. 4) Some State-of-the-Art Fusion Methods: To prove the
3) Other Famous Backbones (AlexNet and DenseNet): We superiority and effectiveness of our method, we compared it
chose the well-known AlexNet and DenseNet as a comparison. with the state-of-the-art method EU-Net based on sEMG and
Since these two networks were for image classification and AUS fusion [22], whose network parameters were shown in
sEMG and AUS data are multichannel signal data. We tried Table V. Also, we compared it with an advanced multimodal
two input methods: one is to use the signal data as input and fusion method RDFKM [23]. Since the input signals are dif-
the other is to transform the signal data into a time-frequency ferent, the structure of the multimodal fusion in RDFKM
map of size 227 × 227 by continue wavelet transform (CWT). was reconstructed for comparison, as illustrated in Fig. 8. The
The time-frequency diagrams of two adjacent sEMG and AUS feature dimension was 64, the same as the original paper.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:00:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 6 =====

7728 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023
Fig. 9. Structure of MMCANet. Every ConvBlocks’ configurations are in Table VI.
TABLE V TABLE VII
EU-NET ARCHITECTURES AVERAGE RECOGNITION RATE OF DIFFERENT FUSION TYPES
CNN features of sEMG and AUS signals and reshaped this
fusion data to (batch size, 32, 2200), then sent it into a three-
layer four-head transformer encoder module. These features
were reweighted with a transformer encoder at an appropri-
ate ratio. In this way, more detailed and hidden features can
be extracted. The next step was to obtain the multimodal and
TABLE VI multilevel spatial-temporal fusion feature of sEMG and AUS
DETAILS OF PROPOSED MMCANET signals by splicing the hybrid transformer encoder feature with
the LSTM time features of the sEMG signals. Finally, the
hybrid features were flattened, then sent to the fully connected
layer for classification training, and the classification activa-
tion function was softmax. The specific network structure is
shown in Fig. 9 and Table VI. The optimizer was SGD, and
the learning rate was 0.001.
E. Details of Traditional Methods
Mean absolute deviation (MAV), waveform length (WL),
zero crossing number (ZC), slop sign changes (SSC), and
5) AUS-sEMG MMCANet: To improve the feature extrac- TD-AR6 were chosen as the sEMG feature. We used
tion capability and classification performance of multisource coefficients of piece-wise linear fitting to characterize the AUS
signals. We need to fuse the sEMG and AUS signals. After feature and applied appropriate PCA on the splicing traits
conducting experimental comparisons of the three fusion of sEMG and AUS normalized features to obtain the hybrid
methods (Table VII), this article adopts the intermediate fusion features. For the selection of classifiers, we used the four
for the feature fusion of sEMG-AUS multimodal fusion oper- most common methods: 1) linear discriminant analysis (LDA);
ation. We proposed an MMCANet structure and sent the 2) k-nearest neighbor algorithm (KNN); 3) support vector
sEMG and AUS signals to their respective networks for feature machine (SVM); and 4) artificial neural network (ANN). The
extraction. For AUS signals, one-layer CNN was performed to n_neighbors in KNN was 10, the standard value in the SVM
extract abstract spatial features, and an SENet module was fol- classifier was the RBF kernel, and hidden_layer_sizes was 128.
lowed to adjust the weight of different channels. For sEMG
signals, CNN, and LSTM networks were employed to extract
III. RESULT AND DISCUSSION
spatial and temporal features successively, and the SENet
A. Experiment 1: Different Fusion Methods
module is embedded between CNN and LSTM.
Further fusion operations were considered to avoid the loss Experimental results comparing different fusion methods
of the sEMG signal’s spatial information. We first joined the showed that, for the multimodal fusion of AUS and sEMG,
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:00:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 7 =====

WEI et al.: MMCANet FOR HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION 7729
TABLE VIII
AVERAGE RECOGNITION RATE BASED ON DIFFERENT FEATURES AND CLASSIFIERS
the intermediate fusion method was better than the front- All of them were higher than the conventional ML
end fusion and back-end fusion, as listed in Table VII. The algorithms.
accuracy of intermediate fusion is 94.14% ± 0.23%, while The comparison of the accuracy of different signals using
the accuracy of front-end fusion and back-end fusion is SVM and DL methods is shown in Fig. 10. We can see that,
90.34% ± 0.28% and 89.82% ± 0.77%, respectively. The whether using the traditional ML algorithm or the MMCANet
intermediate fusion approach improved the accuracy by about in this article, AUS outperforms sEMG in the classification
4% compared to the other two approaches. Since the AUS performance of gesture recognition, which shows that the
signal is a nontime-series signal and the sEMG signal is a AUS signal excels the sEMG signal in terms of classifica-
time-series signal, it is not suitable for front-end fusion. The tion performance of gesture recognition. Multimodal fusion
recognition accuracy of AUS is much higher than that of the features precede single-modal features. The improvement of
sEMG signal [15], which will reduce the recognition accuracy hybrid feature accuracy proves that there are certain comple-
if the back-end fusion is selected, so this article adopts the mentarities between AUS and sEMG in gesture recognition.
intermediate fusion for the feature fusion of sEMG-AUS Meanwhile, for most of the subjects, the accuracy of the DL
multimodal fusion operation. method was higher than that of the traditional ML algorithm.
On average, for the sEMG signal, the CNN-LSTM network
B. Experiment 2: Comparison With Traditional improved 7.83%, 22.98%, 13.53%, and 4.48% compared to
Machine-Learning Methods LDA, KNN, SVM, and ANN, respectively, the CNN method
of AUS improved 7.14%, 7.89%, 5.85%, and 8.11%, and
To indicate the superiority of DL methods in feature extrac-
MMCANet improved 5.15%, 7.73%, 6.40%, and 5.75% sep-
tion and classification, we compare them with manual feature
arately, which improved the performance, especially in the
extraction with four traditional ML patterns: 1) LDA; 2) KNN;
classification accuracy of sEMG signal. The accuracy improve-
3) SVM; and 4) ANN. As shown in Table VIII, in the
ment of the AUS signal showed that the abstract features
case of using traditional ML methods, for sEMG, the high-
extracted by CNN for the AUS signal better represent the
est algorithm of gesture recognition accuracy is ANN of
waveform features of the AUS signal than the manual fea-
75.35%, the lowest is KNN of 53.41%, and the accuracy of
tures. The accuracy improvement of the fused features proved
SVM is 66.30%. For AUS, the recognition accuracy from
the effectiveness of the multimodal multilevel feature fusion
high to low is 84.49%, 83.20%, 82.45%, and 82.23% for
proposed in this article over the conventional methods.
SVM, LDA, KNN, and ANN, respectively. For the fused sig-
nals, the decoding rates of LDA, KNN, SVM, and ANN are
C. Experiment 3: Impact of Different Input Methods
88.99%, 86.41%, 87.74%, and 88.39%, respectively. The aver-
age recognition rates of sEMG, AUS, and fused features using We compared with some famous DL backbones, such as
DL methods were 79.83%, 90.34%, and 94.14%, respectively. AlexNet and DenseNet. The CWT was adopted to convert the
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:00:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 8 =====

7730 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023
Fig. 10. Average recognition rate of SVM classifier and DL methods for sEMG, AUS, and hybrid features.
signals into time-frequency diagrams. Two data organizations: also based on the fusion of sEMG and AUS under the DL
1) original signals and 2) time-frequency graphs were used as framework. Compared with the 91.55% accuracy of EU-Net,
input data. As shown in Table VIII, for sEMG, the recognition MMCANet was 2.59% higher. Since there were few stud-
rates of original data as input with AlexNet and DenseNet ies on the related fusion gesture recognition based on sEMG
were 63.75% and 61.93%. Meanwhile, the recognition results with AUS, we also compared it with a method for multimodal
of the image as input were 77.39% and 77.91%, separately. In fusion of physiological signals, RDFKM. Experimental results
the first case, AlexNet was slightly higher, and the two input show that the recognition rate based on RDFKM was 92.17%,
modes were almost the same in the second case. For AUS, which was 1.97% lower than that of MMCANet. In summary,
the accuracy of AlexNet with signals and images was 74.98% our proposed method can achieve better performance.
and 77.63%. The performances of DenseNet in time series and
spectrograms were 82.16% and 85.66%. Those showed that the
E. Experiment 5: The Results With Deep Learning Method
performance of the image as input was better than that of the
on Different Gestures
signal. DenseNet was better than AlexNet because its residual
The recognition results of different features are illustrated
blocks alleviate overfitting to some extent, but both of them
in Fig. 11. We can see that AUS is better than sEMG in most
were lower than that of single-layer CNN. The factors that
gestures. For the six wrist actions, sEMG had a higher recog-
may cause this result were the overfitting caused by an over-
nition accuracy for the first four actions than the other two
complicated network. Therefore, three-layers and five-layers
gestures. The accuracy for the first four very different motions
CNN structures on AUS signals were compared. In the results,
was close to the result of AUS and fusion features. However,
the more layers, the worse the effect. Those illustrated that
the other two actions, WS and WP, with fewer differences. The
the AUS signal does not need a very complicated network
recognition accuracy was lower. Therefore, the sEMG decod-
structure, so this study only used a single-layer CNN structure
ing rate was lower for motions with smaller amplitude. The
to extract the features of AUS.
recognition rates of AUS and fusion signals were close to
100% for these two motions because despite the amplitude
D. Experiment 4: Comparisons With State-of-the-Arts
being tiny between these two actions, the related muscle dif-
Fusion Methods
ferences were immense. It can be seen from the experimental
The recognition rate of the sEMG signal was 79.83% with results that for most finger movements, the recognition rate of
the CNN-LSTM structure network, and the classification accu- AUS was higher than that of sEMG. However, the rest ges-
racy of AUS signals was 90.34% with the CNN method, ture was likely to be confused with other gestures due to the
which achieved a higher decoding rate than other methods. muscle had a corresponding shape. While the sEMG signal
According to the comparison experiments above, it was illus- was basically in a stable state in the resting state, which was
trated that we had the best feature extraction capability and distinctive from other gestures, the recognition rate of sEMG
recognition rate for the CNN-LSTM and CNN architectures was higher.
proposed by sEMG and AUS, respectively. The average classi- In terms of gesture categories, for the hybrid features, the
fication accuracy of MMCANet was 94.14%. To demonstrate gesture with the highest average recognition rate was RS
the superiority of our proposed method, we have compared 100.00%, and the lowest was TIF 78.75%, half of the motions
it with the proposed fusion methods lately. The EU-Net was recognized at 95% or more, and 30% of the gestures were
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:00:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 9 =====

WEI et al.: MMCANet FOR HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION 7731
Fig. 11. Results of 20 gestures average recognition accuracy for sEMG-CNN-LSTM, AUS-CNN, and sEMG-AUS-MMCANet.
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 12. Projections of different features on 2-D space by tSNE. (a) sEMG.
(b) AUS. (c) sEMG-AUS.
Fig. 13. Two methods of four-fold cross-validation.
more than 99%. For the six wrist movements, the recognition
rate of WUD was the lowest at 94.90%, the other five
movements were above 98%, and the highest identification TABLE IX
AVERAGE GESTURE RECOGNITION ACCURACY OF THE FOUR-FOLD
rate was 99.90% for WS, indicating that the method reached
CROSS-VALIDATION RESULTS
a very high accuracy in wrist gesture recognition. For the 13
fine finger movements, the lowest recognition rate was TIF,
with an accuracy rate of 78.13%, which was mainly affected
by the poor discrimination performance of the sEMG signal
on this movement, and most finger gesture recognition rates
were above 90%, with the highest being PH at 97.71%.
The hybrid feature was better than the sEMG signal in all
20 gestures and better than the AUS feature in most ges-
F. Experiment 6: Four-Fold Cross-Validation
ture decoding. Even if the part of recognition rate of fusion
data was lower than AUS, the difference was within 2%. Four-fold cross-validation was adopted to evaluate the clas-
Because the sEMG signal was the bio-electrical signal of the sification performance of our method in this experiment. We
arm, while the AUS signal was the feature representing the chose two methods to divide all eight trials, as shown in
muscle morphology, the hybrid features can more compre- Fig. 13. The first method was to keep the last four trials as the
hensively illustrate the bio-electric signal state and muscle test set, dividing the first four trials into four folds, of which
morphology in different dimensions. Therefore, the hybrid fea- three folds were used for training and others for validation.
tures can obtain higher accuracy in gesture recognition. As The training would stop early according to the loss of valida-
shown in Fig. 12, the sEMG, AUS, and hybrid characteristics tion set. The second method was to divide all eight trials into
were projected to two dimensions for the visualization. The four folds, three folds for training and one fold for testing,
fusion features can distinguish different gestures better than and training loss was used for early stopping. The results of
the single-modal traits. So they can attain better performances. four-fold cross-validation are shown in Table IX.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:00:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 10 =====

7732 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023
TABLE X
from Method 4, in contrast to using CNN for further feature
AVERAGE GESTURE RECOGNITION ACCURACY OF THE ABLATION
EXPERIMENT RESULTS extraction and fusion, the transformer encoder was more effec-
tive in feature extraction and integration due to its self-attentive
mechanism.
The comparison between the various ablation experimen-
tal methods can indicate the effectiveness of our proposed
MMCANet in multimodal fusion decoding.
H. Future Work
The present study has potential limitations. Due to the lack
From the outcomes of method (a), we can see that the
of relevant public datasets, this study uses our collection of
accuracy trend of early stop using the validation set loss was
sEMG-AUS datasets and therefore lacks comparisons with
almost the same as that of early stop using the training set
other researchers. Thus, the proposed method was compared
loss. The accuracy rate was reduced because method (a) nar-
with four traditional ML algorithms and six DL networks.
rows the training set under the condition that the test set was
In the future, we will try more combinations of multimodal
unchanged. Method (b) was equivalent to expanding the train-
recognition to explore its potential in prosthesis control.
ing set and shrinking the test set. Therefore, all recognition
Meanwhile, in this experiment, there is a lack of data on dis-
rates have increased. Compared with AUS, the accuracy of
abled people. We will try to remedy this deficiency in our
hybrid features decreased from 3.80% to 1.04%, which illus-
future work. In this experiment, only gesture classification
trates that fusion features can achieve better results with less
was recognized but based on the characteristics of sEMG and
training data and have advantages in long-time use.
AUS, the sEMG-AUS fusion signal has potential in joint angle
measure and force estimation, which we will study next.
G. Experiment 7: Ablation Experiment
To investigate the effect of different feature extraction and
combination patterns on networks’ performance, and to bet-
IV. CONCLUSION
ter validate the effectiveness of MMCANet proposed in this In this article, we utilized multimodal sensing combined
article. We used the method of direct combining CNN fea- with sEMG and AUS for gesture recognition and proposed
tures of AUS with CNN-LSTM features of sEMG as the an MMCANet. The model can be employed in the physio-
baseline model and then conducted the following ablation logical signal data jointly collected by sEMG and AUS. The
experiments. Method 1: add CNN features of sEMG to the CNN-LSTM network was used to exact the Spatio-temporal
baseline traits for splicing to obtain triple merged features. features of sEMG. The abstract characteristics of the AUS sig-
Method 2: directly splice the CNN features of AUS with that of nal were extracted by using CNN, and SENets were embedded
sEMG to obtain primary CNN features, then feed the primary at the end of the CNN networks to adjust the weight between
CNN features into CNN with the larger convolutional kernel channels, using a channel attention mechanism to enhance
to obtain high-dimensional CNN features. Finally, merge them the high information channels and reduce the influence of
with the CNN-LSTM features of sEMG to obtain multilevel low informational maps. Then, the sEMG and AUS CNNfeats
fusion features. Method 3: add SENet based on Method 2. were combined to take the fusion feature and sent it to the
Method 4: use Transformer Encoder to fuse the information of transformer encoder module to extract the correlation between
the AUS-sEMG CNN feature. The average gesture recognition different modal traits. Compared with the traditional feature
accuracy of five ablation experiments is shown in Table X. stitching methods and some state-of-the-art fusion techniques,
From the experimental results, it can be seen from the com- the recognition accuracy of the MMCANet improved by at
parison between Baseline and Method 1, that the improvement least 5.15% and 1.97%. The improvement in accuracy over
of the number and type of features can improve the recogni- other strategies confirms the effectiveness of our method. As
tion accuracy because more features and dimensions can better well as the advance, compared with sEMG and AUS alone,
represent the contents and characteristics of the data. From the recognition rate improved by over 3.80%, demonstrating
Method 2, we know that the feature extraction ability of CNN the complementary nature of sEMG and AUS, two distinct
is stronger than the direct feature splicing, which can better modalities of human physiological signals, which have practi-
extract the hidden features between different attributes, and cal significance and application potential for fusion decoding
improve the recognition performance. According to Method 3, of discrete gestures.
we can see that adding the channel attention mechanism can The primary idea of MMCANet is to conduct feature extrac-
generate the feature channel attention maps, carry out the tion for multimodal inputs separately and then perform feature
modification of channel weights, strengthen the more effective fusion of different modalities. CNN has a good feature extrac-
feature maps, and weaken the useless feature maps. Therefore, tion ability for various inputs (images, signals, etc.), and the
it enables the model to extract the valuable features more effi- transformer encoder is general for encoding and integrating
ciently and adequately during training, reduce the influence of high-dimensional features. Those indicate that MMCANet has
invalid features, and thus improve the recognition rate. The more potential in multimodal fusion. In future work, use-case
results showed that the channel attention mechanism can play and applications will be targeted to maximize the performance
a beneficial effect on multichannel multimodal data. Finally, of the proposed network architecture.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:00:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 11 =====

WEI et al.: MMCANet FOR HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION 7733
REFERENCES [22] J. Zeng, Y. Zhou, Y. C. Yang, J. L. Wang, and H. H. Liu, “Feature fusion
of sEMG and ultrasound signals in hand gesture recognition,” in Proc.
[1] Y. Fang, D. Zhou, K. Li, Z. Ju, and H. Liu, “Attribute-driven granu- IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man, Cybern., 2020, pp. 3911–3916.
lar model for EMG-based pinch and fingertip force grand recognition,” [23] X. W. Zhang et al., “Emotion recognition from multimodal physiological
IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 789–800, Feb. 2021. signals using a regularized deep fusion of kernel machine,” IEEE Trans.
[2] Z. Yang et al., “Dynamic gesture recognition using surface EMG signals Cybern., vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 4386–4399, Sep. 2021.
based on multi-stream residual network,” Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., [24] Y. Fang, N. Hettiarachchi, D. Zhou, and H. Liu, “Multi-modal sensing
vol. 9, Oct. 2021, Art. no. 779353. techniques for interfacing hand prostheses: A review,” IEEE Sensors J.,
[3] T.-Y. Pan, W.-L. Tsai, C.-Y. Chang, C.-W. Yeh, and M.-C. Hu, “A vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 6065–6076, Nov. 2015.
hierarchical hand gesture recognition framework for sports referee [25] G. Pomboza-Junez and J. H. Terriza, “Hand gesture recognition based
training-based EMG and Accelerometer sensors,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., on sEMG signals using support vector machines,” in Proc. IEEE 6th
vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 3172–3183, May 2022. Int. Conf. Consum. Electron., 2016, pp. 174–178.
[4] Y. Tang, D. Chen, H. Liu, C. Cai, and X. Li, “Deep EEG [26] C. F. Ma, C. Lin, O. W. Samuel, L. S. Xu, and G. L. Li, “Continuous
superresolution via correlating brain structural and functional con- estimation of upper limb joint angle from sEMG signals based on
nectivities,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., early access, Jun. 14, 2022, SCA-LSTM deep learning approach,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control,
doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2022.3178370. vol. 61, Aug. 2020, Art. no. 102024.
[5] O. Faust, Y. Hagiwara, T. J. Hong, O. S. Lih, and U. R. Acharya, “Deep [27] Y. Sun, B. Xue, M. Zhang, G. G. Yen, and J. Lv, “Automatically
learning for healthcare applications based on physiological signals: designing CNN architectures using the genetic algorithm for image
A review,” Comput. Methods Programs Biomed., vol. 161, pp. 1–13, classification,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 3840–3854,
Jul. 2018. Sep. 2020.
[28] G. M. Zhu et al., “Redundancy and attention in convolutional LSTM
[6] W. Guo, X. Sheng, H. Liu, and X. Zhu, “Toward an enhanced human–
for gesture recognition,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31,
machine interface for upper-limb prosthesis control with combined EMG
no. 4, pp. 1323–1335, Apr. 2020.
and NIRS signals,” IEEE Trans. Human-Mach. Syst., vol. 47, no. 4,
[29] R. Z. Tong, Y. Zhang, H. F. Chen, and H. H. Liu, “Learn the temporal-
pp. 564–575, Aug. 2017.
spatial feature of sEMG via dual-flow network,” Int. J. Humanoid Robot.,
[7] Z. G. Xiao and C. Menon, “A review of force myography research and
vol. 16, no. 4, 2019, Art. no. 1941004.
development,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 20, p. 4557, 2019.
[30] N. Wang, F. Yang, R. Zhang, and F. Gao, “Intelligent fault diagnosis
[8] N. Siddiqui and R. H. M. Chan, “Multimodal hand gesture recogni-
for chemical processes using deep learning multimodel fusion,” IEEE
tion using single IMU and acoustic measurements at wrist,” Plos One,
Trans. Cybern., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 7121–7135, Jul. 2022.
vol. 15, no. 1, p. 12, 2020.
[31] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification
[9] X. Yang, D. Zhou, Y. Zhou, Y. Huan, and H. Lu, “Towards zero with deep convolutional neural networks,” Commun. ACM, vol. 60, no. 6,
re-training for long-term hand gesture recognition via ultrasound sens- pp. 84–90, 2017.
ing,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 1639–1646, [32] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. van der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely
Jul. 2019. connected convolutional networks,” in Proc. 30th IEEE/CVF Conf.
[10] Y. Sun et al., “Intelligent human computer interaction based on Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2017, pp. 2261–2269.
non redundant EMG signal,” Alexandria Eng. J., vol. 59, no. 3, [33] J. Hu, L. Shen, S. Albanie, G. Sun, and E. Wu, “Squeeze-and-excitation
pp. 1149–1157, 2020. networks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 42, no. 8,
[11] J. Qi, G. Jiang, G. Li, Y. Sun, and B. Tao, “Intelligent human-computer pp. 2011–2023, Aug. 2020.
interaction based on surface EMG gesture recognition,” IEEE Access, [34] H. Sirong, W. Ruxin, W. Yishan, and L. Ye, “A spatial attention
vol. 7, pp. 61378–61387, 2019. based convolutional neural network for gesture recognition with HD-
[12] P. Phukpattaranont, S. Thongpanja, K. Anam, A. Al-Jumaily, and sEMG signals,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. e-Health Netw. Appl. Services
C. Limsakul, “Evaluation of feature extraction techniques and classi- (HEALTHCOM), 2021, p. 6.
fiers for finger movement recognition using surface electromyography [35] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. 31st Annu. Conf.
signal,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 2259–2271, 2018. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[13] S. Pancholi and A. M. Joshi, “Improved classification scheme using [36] L. M. Duc, V. S. Rathour, T. Q. Sang, M. Quan, P. Brijesh, and L. Ngan,
fused wavelet packet transform based features for intelligent myoelectric “Multi-module recurrent convolutional neural network with transformer
prostheses,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 8517–8525, encoder for ECG arrhythmia classification,” in Proc. IEEE EMBS Int.
Oct. 2020. Conf. Biomed. Health Inform., 2021, pp. 1–5.
[14] H. Chen, Y. Zhang, G. Li, Y. Fang, and H. Liu, “Surface electromyog- [37] S. Soleymani, A. Dabouei, H. Kazemi, J. Dawson, and N. M. Nasrabadi,
raphy feature extraction via convolutional neural network,” Int. J. Mach. “Multi-level feature abstraction from convolutional neural networks for
Learn. Cybern., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 185–196, 2019. multimodal biometric identification,” in Proc. 24th Int. Conf. Pattern
Recognit. (ICPR), 2018, pp. 3469–3476.
[15] W. Xia, Y. Zhou, X. C. Yang, K. S. He, and H. H. Liu, “Toward portable
[38] L. Xinran, W. Zhongju, and W. Long, “Multimodal fusion for image
hybrid surface electromyography/a-mode ultrasound sensing for human–
and text classification with feature selection and dimension reduction,”
machine interface,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 19, no. 13, pp. 5219–5228,
in Proc. J. Phys. Conf., 2021, Art. no. 12064.
Jul. 2019.
[39] M. Atzori et al., “Building the ninapro database: A resource for the
[16] J. Dong, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, Z. Jia, S. Zhang, and X. Wang,
biorobotics community,” in Proc. 4th IEEE RAS EMBS Int. Conf.
“Comparison of axial length, anterior chamber depth and intraocular
Biomed. Robot. Biomechatronics (BioRob)/Symp. Surgical Robot., 2012,
lens power between IOLMaster and ultrasound in normal, long and short
pp. 1258–1265.
eyes,” Plos One, vol. 13, no. 3, 2018, Art. no. e0194273.
[40] X. C. Yang, X. L. Sun, D. L. Zhou, Y. F. Li, and H. H. Liu,
[17] Y. F. Li, K. S. He, X. L. Sun, and H. H. Liu, “Human-machine interface
“Towards wearable a-mode ultrasound sensing for real-time finger
based on multi-channel single-element ultrasound transducers: A prelim-
motion recognition,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 26,
inary study,” in Proc. 18th IEEE Int. Conf. e-Health Netw. Appl. Services
no. 6, pp. 1199–1208, Jun. 2018.
(Healthcom), 2016, pp. 360–365.
[18] X. Yang, Y. Zhou, and H. Liu, “Wearable ultrasound-based decoding
of simultaneous wrist/hand kinematics,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron.,
vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 8667–8675, Sep. 2021.
[19] J. He, H. Luo, J. Jia, J. T. W. Yeow, and N. Jiang, “Wrist and finger Sheng Wei received the B.S. degree in software
gesture recognition with single-element ultrasound signals: A compari- engineering from the University of South China,
son with single-channel surface electromyogram,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Hengyang, China, in 2019. He is currently pursu-
Eng., vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 1277–1284, May 2019. ing the M.S. degree with the Zhejiang University of
[20] X. C. Yang, J. P. Yan, and H. H. Liu, “Comparative analysis of wear- Technology, Hangzhou, China.
able a-mode ultrasound and sEMG for muscle-computer interface,” IEEE His research interests include biological signal
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 2434–2442, Sep. 2020. processing, human–computer interaction, and deep
learning.
[21] P. Boyd and H. H. Liu, “A-mode ultrasound driven sensor fusion for hand
gesture recognition,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN),
2020, pp. 1–6.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:00:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 12 =====

7734 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2023
Yue Zhang received the M.S. degree in com- Honghai Liu (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
puter science and technology from the Zhejiang degree from King’s College, University London,
University of Technology, Hengyang, China, in London, U.K., in 2003.
2017, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. He is a Chair Professor with the State Key
degree with the Department of Computer science. Laboratory of Robotics and Systems, Harbin
His research interests include intelligent system, Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, and
biological signal processing, human–computer also with the School of Computing, University of
interaction, and adaptive learning methods. Portsmouth, Portsmouth, U.K. He is interested in
intelligent sensing, biomechatronics, pattern recog-
nition, intelligent video analytics, intelligent robotics
and their practical applications with an emphasis on
approaches that could make contribution to the intelligent connection of per-
ception to action using contextual information.
Prof. Liu is an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL
ELECTRONICS and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:00:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.