

===== PAGE 1 =====

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024 131
A Multidataset Characterization of Window-Based
Hyperparameters for Deep CNN-Driven
sEMG Pattern Recognition
Frank Kulwa , Student Member, IEEE, Haoshi Zhang , Oluwarotimi Williams Samuel , Senior Member, IEEE,
Mojisola Grace Asogbon , Member, IEEE, Erik Scheme , Senior Member, IEEE,
Rami Khushaba , Senior Member, IEEE, Alistair A. McEwan , and Guanglin Li , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—The control performance of myoelectric prostheses (window length and overlap) employed for the construction of raw
would not only depend on the feature extraction and classification two-dimensional (2-D) surface electromyogram (sEMG) signals on
algorithms but also on interactions of dynamic window-based hy- the performance of CNNs when used for motion intent decoding.
perparameters (WBHP) used to construct input signals. However, Moreover,weexaminedtherelationshipbetweenthewindowlength
the relationship between these hyperparameters and how they of the 2-D sEMG and three commonly used CNN kernel sizes.
influence the performance of the convolutional neural networks To ensure high confidence in the findings, we implemented three
(CNNs) during motor intent decoding has not been studied. There- CNNs, which are variants of the existing models, and a newly
fore, we investigated the impact of various combinations of WBHP proposed CNN model. Experimental analysis was conducted using
threedistinctbenchmarkdatabases,twofromupperlimbamputees
and one from able-bodied subjects. The results demonstrate that
Manuscript received 3 August 2023; accepted 27 October 2023. Date of
the performance of the CNNs improved as the overlap between
publication 14 December 2023; date of current version 26 January 2024.
This work was supported in part by the Key-Area Research and Development consecutively generated 2-D signals increased, with 75% over-
Program of Guangdong Province under Grant 2020B0909020004, in part by lap yielding the optimal improvement by 12.62% accuracy and
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant #62150410439, 39.60% F1-score compared to no overlap. Moreover, the CNNs
in part by Guangdong Basic and Applied Research Foundation under Grant performance was better for kernel size of seven than three and
#2023A1515011478, in part by the Science and Technology Program of Guang- five across the databases. For the first time, we have established
dong Province under Grant #2022A0505090007, in part by the Ministry of with multiple evidence that WBHP would substantially impact the
Science and Technology, Shenzhen under Grant #QN2022032013L, and in
decoding outcome and computational complexity of deep neural
part by the ANSO Scholarship for Young Talented Students, “The Belt and
networks, and we anticipate that this may spur positive advance-
Road” Innovative Talent Exchange Program for Foreign Experts under Grant
ment in myoelectric control and related fields.
DL2022024002L and Jinan 5150 Program for Talents Introduction. This article
was recommended by Associate Editor X. Hu. (Frank Kulwa and Haoshi
Index Terms—Convolution neural network (CNN), prostheses,
Zhang contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding authors: Oluwarotimi
surface electromyogram (sEMG) signal, upper limb, window
Williams Samuel; Guanglin Li.)
This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval length, window overlap.
of all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by the
Institutional Review Board of Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
ChineseAcademyofSciencesunderApplicationNo.SIAT-IRB-221115-H0626.
I. INTRODUCTION
Frank Kulwa and Haoshi Zhang are with the CAS Key Laboratory of Human- T HE inability of amputees to carry out basic and complex
Machine Intelligence-Synergy Systems, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelli-
arm related tasks reduces their quality of life, which may be
gence and Robotics for Society, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China, and also with the psychologically distressing. To restore limb functionality in am-
Shenzhen College of Advanced Technology, University of Chinese Academy putees, prostheses driven by biosignals from which limb move-
of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: frankkulwankulila@siat.ac.cn; ment intentions can be decoded, have been widely embraced
zhanghaoshi@siat.ac.cn).
[1], [2], [3]. Such signals can be collected either in invasive
OluwarotimiWilliamsSamuelandMojisolaGraceAsogbonarewiththeCAS
Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Intelligence-Synergy Systems, Shenzhen (implantation of sensors within human body [4], [5], [6]) or
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, Shenzhen Institute noninvasive (placement of sensors on the skin surface human
of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, body [7], [8], [9]). Though different biosignals exist, surface
China, and also with the School of Computing and Engineering, University of
electromyogram (sEMG) is considered the most appropriate
Derby, DE22 3AW Derby, U.K. (e-mail: samuel@siat.ac.cn; grace@siat.ac.cn).
signal source for the control of prostheses and other miniaturized
Erik Scheme is with the Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of
NewBrunswick,Fredericton,NBE3B5A3,Canada(e-mail:escheme@unb.ca). robots (such as exoskeleton for stroke patient rehabilitation)
Rami Khushaba is with the Australian Centre for Field Robotics, Sydney due to its noninvasiveness, ease of acquisition, and capability
University,Chippendale,NSW2008,Australia(e-mail:rkhushab@gmail.com). to offer rich set of motor information [10]. The stochastic
Alistair A. McEwan is with the School of Computing and Engineering,
nature of sEMG motivated the use of engineered features for
UniversityofDerby,DE223AWDerby,U.K.(e-mail:a.mcewan@derby.ac.uk).
GuanglinLiiswiththeCASKeyLaboratoryofHuman-MachineIntelligence- characterizing the underlying motion intent (MI) of amputees in
Synergy Systems, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics traditional machine learning models [11], [12]. Besides, various
for Society, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of studies have shown that raw sEMG signals are unsuitable for
Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: gl.li@siat.ac.cn).
prosthetics control [8] and reiterated the need for manually en-
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
gineered features since they are often in low-dimensional space
https://doi.org/10.1109/THMS.2023.3329536.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/THMS.2023.3329536 and can significantly reduce pattern recognition complexity.
2168-2291 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 09:59:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 2 =====

132 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024
However, such engineered features are computed based on sta- on the network’s performance as small size kernels are good
tistical approaches that sometimes fail to capture relationships in mining fine features, which could be missed by large size
across sEMG channels, leading to the loss of underlying motor kernels and vice versa. Therefore, it is important to look at their
information [7]. To address this issue, deep learning methods influence in EMG decoding tasks.
have been proposed for automatic feature learning and can be In an attempt to fill the abovementioned research gaps, this
directly applied to raw two-dimensional (2-D) sEMG signals article thoroughly investigated the impact of 2-D signals con-
for adequate extraction of relevant features across channels [9], structed from raw sEMG recordings using varied combina-
[13]. tions of windowing parameters on the decoding performance
The sEMG-based gesture classification task can be modeled of CNNs. Besides, the CNN models employed are simple and
as a 2-D signal recognition problem using convolutional neural low memory enabling practical deployment in upper limb pros-
networks (CNNs), where the input signal to the CNNs has a size theses. Also, we explored the effects of varying kernel sizes on
of J × W (length x width). Many techniques have been used the classification performance of different CNN models. The ex-
to construct 2-D signals from sEMG, which serve as input to perimentation was carried out using sEMG from three different
deep learning models. For instance, 2-D signals have been con- databases comprising amputees and able-bodied individuals that
structedbasedonspectrogramsobtainedfromshort-timeFourier are mostly used for EMG gesture characterization. Moreover,
transforms [14], scalograms obtained from wavelet transforms the databases include both HD-sEMG and sparse multichannel
[15], and construction from engineered features [16]. Other sEMG signals and contain various degrees of freedom move-
methods include high-density sEMG (HD-sEMG) electrode ar- mentsassociatedwiththefinger,hand,wrist,andelbowgestures,
ray topology (where the 2-D resembles an array of electrode which ensures proper coverage. The four primary contributions
placement during data collection) [17], and from raw sEMG of this work are as follows.
signal segments using overlapping time windows [18] (where 1) To provide insight on the deployment of novel and efficient
the signal width is equal to the number of electrodes and the deep learning driven prostheses control scheme, this study
length matches the segmentation window length). However, the explored the impact of the raw 2-D signals’ window length
use of spectrogram, scalogram and 2-D from engineered features and overlap on the performance of CNNs.
impose extra preprocessing time. While the raw EMG as input 2) We explore the effects of receptive window for different
to CNNs represents a seamless and direct approach, several configurations of CNNs and how they influence the feature
studies have leveraged this option towards attaining fairly decent learning on the raw 2-D signal.
classification performance [16], [18]. This partly motivated us to 3) To aid the optimal selection of window parameters, we
further explore the potential impact of 2-D signals constructed derived a rule of thumb on the relationship between kernel
from raw EMG recordings on CNNs for movement intent de- sizes and window parameters.
coding, which may be necessary in developing time-efficient 4) We proposed a novel variant of CNN model characterized
and intuitive deep learning driven prosthetic control schemes. by low computational complexity with simple yet robust,
Recent research has confirmed that 2-D signals’ temporal and accurate decoding performance.
and spatial information can be used by CNN to extract long
and short-term patterns present in sEMG recordings [17], [19],
[20]. With respect to sparse and high-density surface EMG II. MATERIAL AND METHODS
recordings, previous studies have proposed CNN-based models
A. Description of the EMG Databases Utilized
driven by 2-D signals of varied window length and overlap
constructed from sEMG recordings. For instance, in developing In this study, we utilized three sEMG databases to validate
a CNN model that adopts 2-D signals for movement intent our hypothesis and the performance of the CNNs as follows.
decoding, overlaps of 0 ms, 90 ms, 10 ms, 10 ms, and 30 data Database 1 (DB1): The DB1 is the CapgMyo database (DB-a)
points were applied using window lengths of 150 ms, 150 ms, [29], and it contains HD-sEMG data acquired at a sampling
100 ms, 300 ms, and 150 data points by Bakircioglu and Özkurt frequency of 1000 Hz from 18 able-bodied subjects. The ac-
[16], Tsinganos et al. [18], Atzori et al. [21], Rahimian et al. [22], quisition device had 8 modules of matrix-type (8 × 2) differ-
and Gulati et al. [23], respectively. From these studies and other ential electrode arrays with silver wet electrodes, which were
related works, it is unclear what combination of parameters in fixed around the right forearm. The first acquisition module
terms of window length and overlap would yield the requisite was placed on the extensor digitorum communis muscle at
2-D signals for optimal movement intent decoding (in terms the height of the radio-humeral joint and others were equally
of accuracy and robustness) in CNNs-based pattern recognition spaced clockwise. Eight isotonic and isometric hand gestures
schemes for multifunctional prostheses. Notably, previous stud- were involved, and were the subset of NinaPro database (DB3)
ies have reiterated that variation in window-based hyperparame- [30]. There were 10 repetitions of each motion, each held for 3
ters would substantially impact MI decoding and computational to 10 s. The movements were interspersed with a rest state of
complexity of traditional machine learning models that employ around 7 s to avoid muscle fatigue, and only the preprocessed
engineered features [24], [25], [26], and [27] without addressing data, which contains static part of the motion were used to ensure
deep neural networks. In other words, systematic investigations correct match with the labels. To handle the noisy segment, a
of the optimal combination of window-based hyper parameters second-order Butterworth band stop filter of 45–55 Hz was used
for 2-D signal construction in deep neural networks (DNNs) while other observed artifacts were removed using a band-pass
remains an open research question to the best of the authors’ filter of 20–380 Hz.
knowledge. Database 2 (DB2): This database was acquired in-house from
Convolution kernels act as the feature extraction phase for the four transhumeral amputees. The dataset was collected using
CNN in which the network automatically learn low- and high- the HD-sEMG system (Refa 128 model, TMS International,
level features [28]. The size of the kernel has a great influence Netherlands) with 32 monopolar electrodes and an amplifier
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 09:59:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 3 =====

KULWA et al.: MULTIDATASET CHARACTERIZATION OF WBHP FOR DEEP CNN-DRIVEN SEMG PATTERN RECOGNITION 133
Fig. 2. Framework for the construction of 2-D signals. The relationship
between window length (W) and overlap (V) of any successive data segment
Fig. 1. Electrode location and experiment setup on the amputee during sEMG exploited for constructing 2-D sEMG representation of size JxW is depicted in
data collection for DB2. the figure. Where J is the number of channels i.e., Channel 1 (Ch1), Channel 2
(Ch2) up to Ch(J).
TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF DATABASES DEPLOYED IN THIS STUDY B. Two-Dimensional Signal Construction and Windowing
Technique
The 2-D signals were constructed using a segmentation win-
dow of dimension J × W, where W is the window length and
J is the number of electrodes corresponding to 128, 32, and 12
for DB1, DB2, and DB3, respectively. Precisely, a combination
of various windowing parameters including window lengths
(25 ms, 50 ms, 75 ms, 100 ms, 125 ms, 150 ms, 175 ms, and
200 ms) and different overlaps (0% of W, which denotes no
overlap, 25% of W, 50% of W, and 75% of W) were employed
in constructing varied configuration of 2-D signals. The values
of the windowing parameters were opted based on previous
gain of 26.55. The electrodes were positioned on biceps brachii recommendations [24]. It is worth noting that, in this article,
and triceps brachii of the individuals’ residual limbs in a matrix we denote the overlap as V. For instance, the overlap of 25% of
of 4 × 8, as indicated in Fig. 1. Prior to the data collection, W is denoted as 0.25V, 50% of W is 0.50 V. A description of the
the subjects were given written informed consent and they constructed 2-D signals based on combinations of windowing
providedpermissionforthepublicationoftheirdataforscientific parameters is indicated in Fig. 2.
and educational purposes. During data acquisition, a computer Subsequently, the 2-D signals were partitioned into training
screen was placed in front of the participants and a picture of and test sets. Where a five-fold cross validation protocol was
a particular gesture would be shown for the subject to follow followed. And each time, 80% of the data was used for train-
(see Fig. 1). The five upper limb gestures involved were wrist ing while the unseen 20% was used for testing to avoid data
supination, wrist pronation, no movement, hand close, and hand leakage (a key challenge in building machine learning models).
open (HO). Meanwhile, each motion was held for about 5 s Before training, a Z-score normalization method was applied
with a 5 s rest between two consecutive tasks. Each gesture to the training set to ease the CNN’s learning process [32]. For
was repeated 5 times. The data was sampled at 1024 Hz while the testing set normalization, the mean value to subtract and
50 Hz notch filter and band pass filter with cut-off frequencies the standard deviation to divide as obtained from the training
10—500 Hz were applied to extract requisite signal compo- set were utilized for the normalization process of the test set.
nents. The experiment was approved by the Institutional Review It is noteworthy that during the preliminary experiment, the
Board of Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese min–max [33] and Z-score normalization approaches were ex-
Academy of Sciences. amined. Our choice on using Z-score normalization is based
Database 3 (DB3): The third database denoted as DB3 is a on its consistent excellent movement intent decoding results.
publicly available and known as NinaPro Database 3 [30] and it Additionally, it is important to note that data preprocessing and
contains EMG recordings of 11 transradial amputees. The sparse the subsequent experiments were carried out separately for every
multichannel sEMG signals were recorded via 12 electrode subject.
channels positioned on the residual arm muscles of the amputee.
The electrodes were located around the residual arm. We utilized
C. Convolution Neural Networks
exercise B, which contains 17 classes of movements comprising
9 basic wrist movements and 8 isotonic isometric hand gestures. This study built four different CNN models to investigate
Each movement gesture lasted 5 s with 6 repetitions, followed by the impact of varied configurations of 2-D sEMG. Among
3 s of rest. We directly worked with the preprocessed data, which the four CNNs, Model1 has similar architecture to the model
was sampled at 2000 Hz, filtered with a notch filter of 50 Hz and implementedinourpreviouswork[34].Meanwhile,Model2and
a band pass filter of 20–450 Hz [31]. Table I Summarizes the Model3 are built as variants of existing models and the fourth
difference in the parameters of the three databases used in this (Model4) is entirely proposed by the authors. The architectures
study. of the models are as follows.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 09:59:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 4 =====

134 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024
Model1: Model1 is built based on the CNN model imple-
mented in our preliminary work [34]. Our decision for con-
sidering this network is due to its simple structure and stable
performance. In addition, it takes as input a shape that aligns
with the shape of our 2-D sEMG representation (J x W).
Model2: Inspired by the simplicity of the model proposed
by Bakırcıog˘lu and Özkurt [16], we adopted its feature learn-
ing convolution blocks in building our own CNN variant and
replaced the flattening layer in Bakırcıog˘lu and Özkurt’s net-
work with a global-max pooling, which comparably reduces the
network parameters (to enhance its computational cost) and is
not prone to overfitting [35]. Thus, the Model2 consists of three
convolution blocks each having 80, 100, and 120 nodes with
Fig. 3. Proposed multiscale convolution neural network (MS-CNN). D repre-
similar values of kernel sizes, respectively. Succeeding each
sents the dilation rate.
convolution block is a batch normalization and a max-pooling
layers that allows down sampling of the feature maps by half.
The lower part of the network consists of the global max-pooling
layer for feature reduction and a dense layer of 512 nodes for
high-level feature learning.
Model3: It is an improved version of the network proposed
by Maufroy and Bargmann [36] that comprised two convolu-
tion layers and a fully connected layer each having 100 nodes
designed specifically for 1-D EMG signal processing. Thus, we
came up with a variant of the network by replacing the 1-D
convolution layers with 2-D convolution layers and discarded
the dropout layers after each convolution except after the fully
connected layer. Each convolution is followed by a batch nor- Fig. 4. Conceptualization of dilation: The convolution kernel (L) = 3 × 3 and
malization and max-pooling layer of 2 × 2. Similar to Model2, its dilated filters when dilation rate (D) = 1, 2, and 3.
feature reduction is achieved by using the global max-pooling
layer. Because the networks are trained from scratch, we have the concatenation layer without dimension reshaping while
applied weights initialization in both Model2 and Model3 to al- max-pooling is applied to extract the most essential joint
low quick convergence and optimization of the networks [37]. It features. The second multiscale block (Block 2) has a similar
should be noted that the classification in both networks (Model2 operation to Block 1.
and Model3) is performed using a Softmax layer. The subsequent Block 3 contains two point-wise 1 × 1 con-
Model4 (Multiscale CNN) abbreviated as MS-CNN: The con- volutions. These convolutions enable the network to learn more
volution kernels can be treated as view windows of the network, about the joint features from the multiscale blocks while keeping
large size kernels meaning that the network can view 2-D signal the number of network parameters low [41]. The lower part of
at a large dimension (which includes both spatial information the network incorporates a global max-pooling layer, one fully
across channels, and temporal information within channels) at connected layer of 128 nodes, and the classification layer that
once and learn large grained features, likewise, small kernels can employs a Softmax function. Additionally, all the weights were
model fine features of the signal [38]. Therefore, in this study, initializedusingarandomuniforminitializer.Thekeyoperations
we proposed a MS-CNN model, which combines the advantage of the proposed Model4 are described in Sections II-C1) and
of small and large size kernels to improve the classification II-C2).
performance by learning both fine and large-grained patterns 1) Dilated Convolution Layer for Multiscale and Memory
from the signal while keeping the network parameters as low as Efficiency: Dilated convolution layer is a layer that uses larger
possible. Moreover, inspired by the dilated convolution kernel 2-Dfilterstoextendthestandardconvolutionlayer. Fig.4depicts
concept [39], we have utilized them as core layers to achieve the the conceptual representation of a typical dilation process in
multiscale task. The architecture of the proposed network herein the context of the proposed MS-CNN. In order to optimize
referred to as Model4 is presented in Fig. 3. the number of network parameters, traditional CNNs exploit
The essential functional layers in the MS-CNN (see Fig. 3) convolution with small filters (2 × 2 or 3 × 3). However, di-
are the multiscale block 1 and block 2 composed of dilated lated convolution filters are an easy approach to generating
convolution layers at different scales (dilation rates) to enable an a CNN with large filters such as 5 × 5, 7 × 7. while keeping
exponential increase of large receptive fields without loss of out- the parameters similar to 2 × 2 or 3 × 3 kernels. A dilated
put resolution [40]. The input to the network is fed to block1 via convolution with an enlargement rate of d places d − 1 zeros
two means including the upper and lower paths with each having in between successive filter values, which results in enlarging
its own scales. Meanwhile, the upper path contains convolution the size of a L filter to [ L + (L − 1)(d − 1)(d − 1)]. It should
with kernel size = 3 and dilation = 1 to model fine features. be noted that the quantity of nonzero parameters remains equal
The lower path contains convolution with kernel size = 3 and as before. In addition, the dilated filters significantly expand
dilation = 4, which is equivalent to the conventional kernel of CNN’s receptive field, allowing it to capture more contextual and
size = 9 with output resolution equivalent to 3 × 3 convolution. spatialinformation[42].Asaresult,itenablesflexiblemultiscale
Such a large kernel can learn coarse (general) features from contextual information aggregation while maintaining the same
the input. The outputs of the two paths are combined by resolution.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 09:59:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 5 =====

KULWA et al.: MULTIDATASET CHARACTERIZATION OF WBHP FOR DEEP CNN-DRIVEN SEMG PATTERN RECOGNITION 135
TABLE II TABLE III
NUMBER OF EPOCHS FOR EACH MODEL AND DATABASE EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSES PERFORMED FOR THE THREE PARAMETERS FOR
DIFFERENT MODELS (THE PARAMETERS WERE THE SAME FOR EVERY
SUBJECT)
2) Handling Internal Covariant Shift Within the MS-CNN:
A major challenge of nonstationary signals such as the sEMG
is the lack of a common distribution, which sometimes result myoelectric pattern recognition. Additionally, to verify the sta-
in internal covariant shift within the network [43]. To resolve tistical significance of the proposed method, a nonparametric
this issue, batch normalization layers were introduced after Friedman’s test was conducted followed by Dunn’s post hoc
each convolution block, and the exponential linear unit (ELU) test. The definitions for the metrics are indicated in
activation function was leveraged afterwards in requisite layers. TP + TN
Thus, the ELU activation function is expressed mathematically, Accuracy = (2)
TP + FP + TN + FN
as shown in
(cid:2) 2TP
f ELU (x k ) = ∝ x k (exp (x ) − 1) ( (x x k > ≤ 0 0 ) ) (1) F1 − score = 2TP + FP + FN . (3)
k k
From (2) and (3), true negative (TN) and true positive (TP)
where x k is the filter output in the kth channel and ∝ represents are the number of accurately classified negative and positive
a parameter to control the value to which an ELU saturates for
samples, respectively. The number of positive cases classified as
negative inputs. In this study, the default value ∝= 1 was con-
negative is a false negative (FN), while the number of negative
sidered. For negative inputs, the ELU activation function returns
samples predicted as positive is false positive (FP).
negative values, as a result its mean (average) outputs approach
zero than that of ReLU. Hence, the ELU activation function
can improve network learning [44]. Thus, in the MS-CNN, III. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
each pointwise convolution is followed by an ELU activation
A. Analyzing the Impact of Window Length and Overlap on
function.
the Performance of the CNNs.
In this section, we investigated whether or not the 2-D signals
D. Experimental Setups
constructed from varied combinations of window length (W)
Since the Adam Optimizer [45] demonstrated the best net- and overlap (V) would impact the decoding performance of
work performance (in our preliminary/pilot experiments of find- CNNs. For each experiment, the W was kept constant while
ing the optimal hyperparameters for the models) compared to varying the V and vice versa. And the corresponding signals
the stochastic gradient descent optimizer [46], all the described were used to train the built CNNs described in Section II-C. For
models were trained using Adam Optimizer with a learning instance, 2-D signals obtained from W of 175 ms and an overlap
rate of 0.0001. It should also be noted that at least one subject of “75% of W” were employed to train and test a CNN with
from each DB was used to get the optimal hyperparameters a kernel size of 3. Similarly, the impact of other combinations
for the models during preliminary experiments. Besides, due of W and V across kernel sizes on the CNNs was examined.
to its superior performance in multiclass tasks, the categorical Meanwhile, the experiments were carried out for each of the
cross-entropy [47] was utilized as the loss function. The number databases described in Section II-A and the obtained results are
of epochs for each model was set depending on the character- presented as follows. Table III summarizes the overall analyses
istics of the dataset in each database, as indicated in Table II. per subject. Because the results for all three kernels (3, 5, and 7)
Thus, the number of iterations/epochs was varied in every model show a similar trend, we only presented the results for kernel size
separately to allow optimal convergence while leaving out only of 3. The average motion classification performance for every
the effects of the studied parameters (overlap, window length, combination of window parameters (W versus V) across kernel
and kernel sizes) to be observed. sizes and subjects for the different CNNs for Database 1 (DB1)
To analyze the impact of kernel size on the performance of are presented in Fig. 5 in accuracy and Table IV in F1-score.
the CNNs per time, the same size of the kernel was applied to all Analyzing the results in [see Fig. 5(a)], it can be seen that
convolution layers of the models. Hence, we utilized kernel sizes the accuracy in every CNN improves when the percentage of
of 3 × 3, 5 × 5, and 7 × 7 since they are the basic kernels that overlap (V) increases at constant window length (W) and kernel
have been employed in prior studies and yielded relatively good size (K). For instance, the accuracy of Model1 at W = 25 ms
performances [14], [16], [18], [21], [22]. It should be noted that increases from 97.22%, 97.79%, 98.32%, to 98.74% when V
Model4, utilizes kernels with resolution equivalent to 3. Thus, increases from 0 V, 0.25 V, 0.50 V, to 0.75 V, respectively. This
it was not included in experiments involving the variation of indicates a significant improvement upon statistical analysis re-
kernels 5 × 5 and 7 × 7. sults when comparing overlap 0 V and 0.75 V (p-value: 7x10−6).
Evaluation Measures When investigating the effects of varying W at constant V in a
To analyze the performance of the different networks, we particular model, the results show no considerable difference.
used benchmark evaluation metrics that include accuracy and For instance, in Model1, the performances at the overlap of
F1-score, as they have been widely adopted in the field of 0.75 are 98.74%, 98.88%, 98.84%, 98.86%, 98.84%, 98.74%,
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 09:59:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 6 =====

136 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024
(a) (b)
Fig. 5. Classification accuracy of Model1, Model2, Model3, and Model4, when they are applied to DB1. (a) Each subpart in the graphs contains results of all
models at the same window length and varied overlaps 0 V, 0.25 V, 0.50 V, and 0.75 V, which are equivalent to 75% of W, 50% of W, 25% of W, and 0% of W.
Note: Window length (W) unit is in millisecond (ms). (b) Average classification results across window lengths. (a) The classification accuracy for every window
length at varied overlaps. Kernel = 3. (b) Average accuracy accross window lenghts. Kernel = 3.
TABLE IV
CLASSIFICATION F1-SCORE OF MODEL1, MODEL2, MODEL3, AND MODEL4 AT KERNEL SIZE=3 WHEN APPLIED ON DB1
98.79%, and 98.91% at W of 25 ms, 50 ms, 75 ms, 100 ms, B. Analyzing the Effect of Network Receptive Fields Against
125 ms, 150 ms, 175 ms, and 200 ms, respectively. To further the Generated 2-D sEMG Signals.
examine this phenomenon, the F1-score results in Table IV also
show that the model’s performance improved by increasing the The effect of each model’s kernel size on different 2-D
percentage of overlap at constant window length. Similarly, the sEMG signals constructed using varied windowing parameters
average results displayed in Fig. 5(b)(accuracy) and Table IV was investigated in this section. The experiments were carried
(F1-score), show that the overlap of 75% (0.75 V) achieved out by varying kernel sizes (3, 5, and 7) while keeping each
much better classification results for upper limb MI decoding window length constant and the networks were configured to
irrespective of the window length. utilize a specific kernel size per training phase. Due to the
To further validate the abovementioned results, we conducted relatively stable and higher performances observed when the
the experiments using amputee databases (D2 and DB3) whose overlap was 75%, only this overlap was reported in this section
results are presented in Figs. 6 and 7 in accuracy, and Table V for brevity. Moreover, due to the architecture of Model4, which
and 6 in F1-score, respectively. The accuracy results in Figs. 6 only incorporates kernels with a resolution equivalent to 3, it was
and 7(for DB2 and DB3, respectively), show that the perfor- excluded from the analysis in the section for a fair comparison.
mance of all the networks increases with an increase in overlap Thus, the F1-score results for three models at different kernel
at a fixed window size per time with statistical significance sizes when 2-D signals were generated from DB1, DB2, and
of p = 4.0x10−6, 3.0x10−6, 3.0x10−6, 7.9x10−5 for model1, DB3 are presented in Fig. 8.
model2, model3, and model4 in DB2, respectively. While Based on analysis of the results for DB1 presented in Fig. 8(a),
p = 3.62x10−4, 2.4x10−5, 2.8 x10−5, 8.26x10−3 were observed in general, the kernel size of 7 yields better classification per-
in DB3 for model1, model2, model3, and model4, respectively, formance across the networks (Model1, Model2, and Model3)
when comparing the results of overlap 0v and 0.75. Also, the as the window length increases from 25 ms to 200 ms.
F1-score values in Tables V and VI depict similar trend, fur- Also, the trend of increment for kernel sizes of 3, 5, and 7 can
ther corroborating the phenomenon observed for the accuracy be observed to be similar in all the models except at window
metrics. 175 in Model1 and Model2, and window 125 in Model3, where
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 09:59:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 7 =====

KULWA et al.: MULTIDATASET CHARACTERIZATION OF WBHP FOR DEEP CNN-DRIVEN SEMG PATTERN RECOGNITION 137
(a) (b)
Fig. 6. Classification accuracy of Model1, Model2, Model3, and Model4, when they are applied to DB2. (a) Each subpart in the graphs contains results of all
models at the same window length and varied overlaps 0 V, 0.25 V, 0.50 V, and 0.75 V, which are equivalent to 75% of W, 50% of W, 25% of W, and 0% of W. Note:
Window length (W) unit is in millisecond (ms). (b) Average classification results across window lengths. (a) Classification accuracy of every window length at
varied overlaps. Kernel = 3. (b) Average accuracy accross window lengths. Kernel = 3.
(a) (b)
Fig. 7. Classification (in accuracy) of Model1, Model2, Model3, and Model4, when they are applied to DB3. (a) Each subpart in the graphs contains results of
all models at the same window length and varied overlaps 0 V, 0.25 V, 0.50 V, and 0.75 V, which are equivalent to 75% of W, 50% of W, 25% of W, and 0% of
W. Note: Window length (W) unit is in millisecond (ms). (b) Average classification results across window lengths. (a) Classification accuracy for every window
length at varied overlaps. Kernel = 3. (b) Average accuracy accross window lengths. Kernel = 3.
TABLE V
CLASSIFICATION F1-SCORE OF MODEL1, MODEL2, MODEL3, AND MODEL4 AT KERNEL SIZE=3 WHEN APPLIED ON DB2
kernel 5 recorded an average F1-score value that is better than is no significant and consistent (increase) effect when varying
that of kernel 7. The average performance shows that kernel size window length (at constant kernel) in the network’s performance
of 3 led to the least classification results in all the CNNs. Besides, in this database (DB1) except from window 25 to 50 ms for
the statistical analysis between kernel 3 and 7 show a significant Model1, and from 25 to 75 ms for Model2 and Model3.
improvement of p = 0.9.92x10−4, 1.30x10−3, and 1.83x10−2. By closely analyzing the variation of kernel sizes and window
Although the impact is realized when varying kernel sizes, there lengths for DB2 in Fig. 8(b), an increase in the performance of
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 09:59:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 8 =====

138 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024
TABLE VI
CLASSIFICATION F1-SCORE OF MODEL1, MODEL2, MODEL3, AND MODEL4 AT KERNEL SIZE=3 WHEN APPLIED ON DB3
Fig. 8. Classification performance of Model1, Model2, and Model3 while varying the network kernels (3, 5, and 7) at different 2-D signal lengths (W) of 25, 50,
75, 100, 125, 150, 175, and 200 of DB1, DB2, and DB3. AV is the average results across all window lengths. Note: Window length (W) unit is in millisecond
(ms). (a) Variation of kernel sizes and window lengths in DB1. (b) Variation of kernel sizes and window lengths in DB2. (c) Variation of kernel sizes and
window lengths in DB3.
every model is realized when the size of kernels increases from impact in the performance of CNNs especially in Model2 and
3, 5 to 7. The observation in this database shows that the use Model3 where the graphs show a positive gradient with the
of large-size kernels improves the CNN’s performance signif- increase in window lengths for all window sizes (from 25 ms
icantly (with p<0.05 in all models) regardless of the window to 200 ms) in Model2, and from 100 ms to 200 ms in Model2 at
length. Moreover, the variation of window lengths shows an constant kernel size.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 09:59:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 9 =====

KULWA et al.: MULTIDATASET CHARACTERIZATION OF WBHP FOR DEEP CNN-DRIVEN SEMG PATTERN RECOGNITION 139
From the results illustrated in Fig. 8(c) for DB3, the perfor-
manceofeverymodelincreaseswiththeincreaseinkernelsizeat
constant window length. Although the database contains signals
from amputees, kernel = 7 has achieved good performance.
Comparing the results of kernels 7 and 3 a significant increase
in the performance of the models was observed for DB3 with
p<0.05 in Model 1 and Model3. In that respect the maximum
improvement of 18.46% is observed in Model1 with a window
length of 125 ms, while 8.35% is observed in Model2 with a
window of 75 ms, and 31.75% in Model3 with a window of
50 ms. Contrary to previous databases (DB1 and DB2), the
effects of increasing window length at constant kernel signif-
icantly increase the performance of the networks when DB3
was utilized. For example, the results in Model1 with a kernel
of 3 improved from 47.48%, 57.81%, 62.42%, 65.42%, 67.09%,
69.29%, 71.32%, to 72.77% F1-score at window lengths of
25, 50, 75, 100, 125, 150, 175, and 200 ms, respectively. This
observation correlates with the previous study, which shows that
the impact of window length is more evident in a small number
of channels [26].
C. Analysis of Individual Limb MI Across Window Overlaps
and Kernel Sizes
The analysis in the previous sections only presents an
overview of motion classification outcomes with respect to
varied combinations of window lengths, overlaps (V), and ker-
nel sizes (K). Thus, it is necessary to look into the effects of
these parameters on the classification performance of individual
classes of movement. Hence, for each of the studied databases,
the impact of kernel size and overlap on the categorization
of a certain class of motion is described in this section. It is
Fig. 9. Confusion matrices for Model1 on classification performance across
noteworthy that the results of W = 200 were considered due eachmotionintentioninDB1,DB2,andDB3.(a)Classificationperformancefor
to its high performances (as indicated in Section III-B) and every motion intent in DB1. M1 M8 represent the 8 motion intents in DB1. (b)
only Model1 was presented because the results in other models Classification performance for every motion intent in DB2. Where, the output
motions in DB2 are, wrist supination (WS), wrist pronation (WP), no movement
follow the same trend. Additionally, the confusion matrices for
(NM), hand close (HC), and hand open (HO). (c) Classification performance of
the average results across all subjects are presented for the lowest
Model1 for every motion in DB3. H1 H17 represents the 17 gestures in DB3.
performing combination (Kernel = 3 and overlap of 0 V) and
highest performing combination K = 7 and overlap = 0.75 V.
The impacts of window parameters on each MI classification D. Analysis of Time Delay of the CNNs for Varied Window
were examined in DB1, DB2, and DB3 and the results are Parameters of 2-D sEMG Signals
presented in Fig. 9.
In this section, we quantified the corresponding latency ef-
Considering the analysis in Fig. 9(a) for DB1, it can be seen
ficiency of the CNNs when the constructed 2-D sEMG signals
that most of the individual gestures have attained results below
80.00% at the lowest combination (K = 3 and overlap of 0%),
were applied. In this case, the response time (T e) is an essential
parameter that reflects the delay observed when the CNN model
however, the application of kernel = 7 and overlap of 75%
is deployed in a prosthesis for use in practical settings. This
led to significant improvement in MI classification performance
parameter could be seen as a function of the amount of time taken
(above 98.00%) in all gestures.
to decode a MI task from a single trial evaluation. The previous
Likewise, the investigation across individual limb MI task
studies investigated the microcontroller delay time when the
in the amputee database (DB2) in Fig. 9(b) shows that the
prosthesis is in use and found that it can be computed using
classification performances of all gestures were improved from
the relationship in (4) [26], [24], [25].
below 74.00% to above 88.00% for all gestures when the lowest
combination was replaced by the highest combination. 1 1
The same trend is observed in Fig. 9(c) for DB3, where DT = 2 W + 2 V + T e (4)
the application of 75% overlap and kernel of 7 has achieved
performances above 86.00%. This demonstrates that networks where DT is the microcontroller delay time, W is the window
at kernel = 7 and the 2-D sEMG signals with a 75% overlap length, V is the overlap, and T e is the response time of CNN
would be a perfect combination for characterizing sEMG signal (from preprocessing the sEMG and generation of 2-D signals
patterns associated with these classes of hand gestures. to yielding a decision). Thus, (4) was utilized to compute the
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 09:59:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 10 =====

140 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024
TABLE VII IV. DISCUSSION
DELAY TIME (IN SECONDS) OF A SINGLE TRIAL OF MOVEMENT ON DB1
This work investigated the relationship between the length of
the 2-D sEMG signal window and the overlap, which can pro-
duce the network’s best performance. We also studied how CNN
kernel sizes affect the network’s performance on classification
tasks when raw 2-D sEMG signals constructed using different
combinations of window length and overlaps were used as input
to the CNN. The investigation considered four different kinds
of CNN models. It should be noted that, although this study
focused on raw EMG as input to the CNN, we also acknowledge
the potential of using other forms of inputs to the CNN such as
spectrograms [48].
Specifically, the results presented in Section III-A demon-
strated the effects of window overlap and window length of
TABLE VIII the generated 2-D signals on the performance of the CNNs. In
AVERAGE DELAY TIME (SECONDS) OF A SINGLE TRIAL OF MOVEMENT IN DB2 general, the results in Fig. 5 and Table IV, Fig. 6 and Table V,
and Fig. 7 and Table VI for DB1, DB2, and DB3, respectively,
show that the performance of the CNNs is greatly influenced
by the amount of overlap in the generated 2-D signals. Interest-
ingly, the highest overlap achieved the maximum improvement
of 20.91% in DB1, 31.70% in DB2, and 39.60% F1-score in
DB3. Further analysis is presented in Section III-C (see Fig. 9),
which depicts the effects of varying window overlaps and kernel
sizes on the individual motion intention in Fig. 9(a)(for DB1),
Fig. 9(b)(for DB2), and Fig. 9(c)(for DB3). The classification
performances across individual motion intents show that 75%
(0.75 V) of signal overlap has achieved higher performances
in all gestures compared to 0% overlap (0V). This, emphasizes
TABLE IX
that the use of 2-D sEMG signal with large overlaps can achieve
AVERAGE DELAY TIME (SECONDS) OF A SINGLE TRIAL OF MOVEMENT IN DB3
reasonable and practical results for CNN.
On the other hand, the results in Section III-B show that the
effect of window length of 2-D sEMG signals becomes signifi-
cant when the number of channels decreases. In that regard, the
impacts of varying window lengths were not realized when DB1
with 128 channels (signals of size Wx128) was used, as indicated
in Fig. 8(a). The effect started to show up in DB2 (32 channels)
in Fig. 8(b). A consistent and positive impact of window length
is observed in Fig. 8(c) when DB3 (which uses 2-D signals
from 12 channels) was deployed. This finding corroborates the
previous work [26], on engineered features, which also showed
that the effects of window length increase with the decrease in
the number of channels. This relationship is likely described by
latency(programexecutiontime)oftheCNNsbuiltbasedonvar- the feature space in nondense channels (i.e., 12 channels in DB3)
ied combination of window parameters across the kernel sizes, that provide less spatial information, which on the other hand can
as shown in Tables VII, VIII, and IX, for the three databases be compensated by additional temporal information provided by
(DB1, DB2, and DB3), respectively. longer window lengths. But longer window lengths provide less
By closely analyzing the results across one trial of movement benefit to large-channel clusters (i.e., 128 channels in DB1 and
in Tables VII, VIII, and IX, it can be seen that the delay time 32 channels in DB2) that are already more adequately distributed
decreases with a decrease in the overlap. The overlaps of 75% in feature space.
have the highest computation times. Moreover, the increase The CNN’s kernel can be thought of as the network’s eye; the
in kernel size also increases the inference time. DB2 (see Ta- larger the kernel, the larger the network’s receptive field, allow-
ble VIII) has the highest times relative to other databases. While ing it to see more of the signal and identify more widespread
the delay times in DB1 (see Table VII) are all (except for W spatial patterns (features), whereas a smaller kernel size iden-
= 50, 75, and 200 ms at overlap 0.75 V) within an acceptable tifies finer features [22]. The results attained in Fig. 8 indicate
range for the practical application of the prostheses, which is that the increase in kernel size improves the CNN’s performance
stated to be below 200 ms [24]. All delay times in DB3 (see by a significant margin at constant window length, with the
Table IX) are within the acceptable range. Therefore, when con- peak performance attained by kernel = 7. This implied that
sidering the combination of both accuracy and time efficiency the patterns of the sEMG signals can be modeled over a large
of the CNNs for prostheses-based applications, networks with spatial dimension of the signal [49]. Besides, a wide field of view
kernel = 7 and an overlap of 50% would yield reliable operations allows the network to learn hidden temporal connectivity within
in all databases (below 200 ms) and 75% overlap for DB3. the signal [22]. Hence, it can model both spatial and temporal
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 09:59:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 11 =====

KULWA et al.: MULTIDATASET CHARACTERIZATION OF WBHP FOR DEEP CNN-DRIVEN SEMG PATTERN RECOGNITION 141
patterns of the signal. This provides us with an insight that it manufacturing the prostheses, a combination of 75% overlap
may be essential to consider shallow networks but with large with shallow CNN but large kernel sizes (such as 7) would
kernels to have classifiers with high accuracy, which are time provide considerably high accuracy, time, and memory effi-
and memory efficient. ciency. These findings will help assist prostheses manufacturers
Additionally, when we compare the general results across indevelopingmoreefficientsEMG-basedgesturerecognitional-
different databases between the amputees-based database (DB2 gorithms. The newly proposed CNN model yielded significantly
and DB3) and the database containing the able-bodied subjects’ better motor decoding performance than others tested, thus, its
data (DB1). The results obtained in DB1 in all experiments are deployment in prosthetics and other fields such as rehabilitation
relatively higher than in DB2 and DB3. This could be due to the control systems could facilitate multifunctional and intuitive
high quality of the signals collected from able-bodied subjects EMG-PR control schemes. Finally, for the first time, we have
contrary to the amputee subjects, whose signal qualities are been able to establish with substantial evidence through multiple
normally low due to limited residual muscles [50]. However, the experiments that window-based hyper-parameters substantially
applicationofahighpercentageofoverlaps(particularly75%)in impact the decoding outcome and computational complexity of
the generated 2-D signals has improved the classification results deep neural networks. In general, we anticipate that this novel
of DB2 and DB3 to an acceptable level in all Models. Therefore, finding may spur positive development in myoelectric control
a combination of 75% overlap and large kernels such as 7 may and related fields.
have the potential to realize the practical use of CNN-based Transfer learning, where a pretrained model is fine-tuned on a
prostheses. small dataset from the end-application, is an important technique
Furthermore, we estimated the possible delay time of the when using little data (especially human data such as with EMG)
prosthesis microcontroller based on CNNs in relation to the for training deep learning models. In that respect, due to their
window length, overlap, and kernel size on a single trial of simplicity and good performance, we anticipate that the CNN
movement, as indicated in Tables VII, VIII, and IX. The trend models proposed in this study can be useful for transfer learning
shows that the delay time increases with an increase in overlap of parsimonious models in EMG-related fields/tasks such as
and kernel sizes. Besides, we discovered that when considering intersubject and interlimb/hand domain adaptation.
efficiency in time and accuracy, an overlap of 50% and a kernel Despite the merits of the findings observed in this study,
size of 7 can give an ideal response in all tested databases but the analyses were based on offline experiments. Consequently,
with slightly low accuracy compared to 75% overlap, which there is still room for improvement, particularly in the aspect of
gives the highest accuracy (in all databases) with slightly low incorporation of hyperparameters and investigating the variation
efficiency in time, particularly in DB1 and DB2. Hence, such a of window parameters in the performance of the CNN models in
tradeoff between overlaps of 50% and 75% could be taken into an online setting. In our future study, we hope to further validate
account by the prosthesis manufacturers. In general, the analysis the findings of the study and the performance of the proposed
presented in this study leads to the following rule of thumb: The CNN network in an online setting, taking factors that may
overall decoding performance of convolutional neural networks impact the real-time control performance of the multifunctional
is observed to be highly dependent on the window based hyper- prostheses into consideration.
parameters including overlap and kernel size, which validates
our hypothesis.
Finally, we compared the relative performance of the pro-
posed model MS-CNN (Model4) and other models, which have
been used in the study (Model1, Model2, and Model3). Con- REFERENCES
sidering the average classification results depicted in Figs. 5(b),
6(b), and 7(b), it can be observed that the proposed Model4 [1] E. Nsugbe, C. Phillips, M. Fraser, and J. McIntosh, “Gesture recognition
fortranshumeral prosthesiscontrol usingEMGand NIR,” IETCyber-Syst.
achieved the highest performances in all overlaps in DB1 [see
Robot., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 122–131, 2020.
Fig. 5(b)], in DB2 [see Fig. 6(b)] for all overlaps except overlap [2] S. Pancholi and A. M. Joshi, “Electromyography-based hand gesture
of 75%, and in DB3 [see Fig. 7(b)] all overlaps except for overlap recognition system for upper limb amputees,” IEEE Sensors Lett., vol. 3,
of 75%. The stable performances exhibited by Model4 across no. 3, Mar. 2019, Art. no. 5500304.
[3] N. N. Unanyan and A. A. Belov, “Design of upper limb prosthesis using
all databases suggest that the proposed Model4 would be more
real-time motion detection method based on EMG signal processing,”
suitable for decoding sEMG based motion intents.
Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 70, 2021, Art. no. 103062.
[4] J.M.Hahne,D.Farina,N.Jiang,andD.Liebetanz,“Anovelpercutaneous
electrode implant for improving robustness in advanced myoelectric con-
V. CONCLUSION trol,” Front. Neurosci., vol. 10, 2016, Art. no. 114.
[5] T.S.Daviset al.,“Restoringmotorcontrolandsensory feedbackinpeople
This work has extensively examined the impacts of varying
with upper extremity amputations using arrays of 96 microelectrodes
the segmentation window parameters for raw 2-D sEMG signal implanted in the median and ulnar nerves,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 13, no. 3,
construction and kernel sizes on the performance of CNNs 2016, Art. no. 036001.
for upper limb movement classification. Moreover, we have [6] J. S. Hebert et al., “Novel targeted sensory reinnervation technique to
restore functional hand sensation after transhumeral amputation,” IEEE
designed a less complex, accurate, and memory-efficient CNN
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 765–773, Jul. 2014.
model whose key operations are based on dilation convolutional [7] W.Yang,D.Yang,Y.Liu,andH.Liu,“Decodingsimultaneousmulti-DOF
layers. From the experimental results, we found that the combi- wrist movements from raw EMG signals using a convolutional neural
nation of kernel size of 7 and overlap of 75% achieved higher network,” IEEE Trans. Human-Mach. Syst., vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 411–420,
Oct. 2019.
classification performance than other combinations with slightly
[8] L. J. Hargrove, E. J. Scheme, K. B. Englehart, and B. S. Hudgins, “Mul-
low computational time. However, a combination of kernel size
tiple binary classifications via linear discriminant analysis for improved
of 7 and an overlap of 50% gives acceptable computational controllabilityofapoweredprosthesis,”IEEETrans.NeuralSyst.Rehabil.
time with slightly lower classification accuracy. Therefore, when Eng., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 49–57, Feb. 2010.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 09:59:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 12 =====

142 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS, VOL. 54, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024
[9] U. Côté-Allard, E. Campbell, A. Phinyomark, F. Laviolette, B. Gosselin, [28] S¸. Öztürk, U. Özkaya, B. Akdemir, and L. Seyfi, “Convolution kernel
and E. Scheme, “Interpreting deep learning features for myoelectric con- size effect on convolutional neural network in histopathological image
trol: A comparison with handcrafted features,” Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., processing applications,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Fundamentals Elect. Eng.,
vol. 8, 2020, Art. no. 158. 2018, pp. 1–5.
[10] H. Zhou et al., “Toward hand pattern recognition in assistive and rehabil- [29] W. Geng, Y. Du, W. Jin, W. Wei, Y. Hu, and J. Li, “Gesture recognition by
itation robotics using EMG and kinematics,” Front. Neurorobot., vol. 15, instantaneoussurfaceEMGimages,”Sci.Rep.,vol.6,no.1,2016,pp. 1–8.
2021, Art. no. 659876. [30] M. Atzori et al., “Electromyography data for non-invasive naturally-
[11] X. Li et al., “A new approach to mitigate the effect of force variation on controlled robotic hand prostheses,” Sci. Data, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–13,
pattern recognition for myoelectric control,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Int. Conf. 2014.
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2016, pp. 1684–1687. [31] J. Chang, A. Phinyomark, and E. Scheme, “Assessment of EMG bench-
[12] O.W.Samueletal.,“Spatio-temporalbaseddescriptorforlimbmovement- mark data for gesture recognition using the ninapro database,” in Proc.
intentcharacterizationinEMG-patternrecognitionsystem,”inProc.IEEE IEEE 42nd Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2020, pp. 3339–3342.
41st Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2019, pp. 2637–2640. [32] S. Shin, Y. Baek, J. Lee, Y. Eun, and S. H. Son, “Korean sign language
[13] R. N. Khushaba and K. Nazarpour, “Decoding HD-EMG signals recognition using EMG and IMU sensors based on group-dependent NN
for myoelectric control-how small can the analysis window size models,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Ser. Comput. Intell., 2017, pp. 1–7.
be?,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 8569–8574, [33] A. Shalabi and Z. Shaaban, “Normalization as a preprocessing engine for
Oct. 2021. data mining and the approach of preference matrix,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
[14] X. Zhai, B. Jelfs, R. H. Chan, and C. Tin, “Self-recalibrating surface EMG Dependability Comput. Syst., 2006, pp. 207–214.
pattern recognition for neuroprosthesis control based on convolutional [34] F.Kulwa,O.W.Samuel,M.G.Asogbon,O.O.Obe,andG.Li,“Analyzing
neural network,” Front. Neurosci., vol. 11, 2017, Art. no. 379. the impact of varied window hyper-parameters on deep CNN for sEMG
[15] D. C. Oh and Y. U. Jo, “Classification of hand gestures based on multi- based motion intent classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Metrol.
channelEMGbyscaleaveragewavelettransformandconvolutionalneural Ind. 4.0 IoT, 2022, pp. 81–86.
network,” Int. J. Control, Automat. Syst., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1443–1450, [35] W. Jia et al., “Adjacent age classification algorithm of yellow-feathered
2021. chickens based on multi-scale feature fusion,” Comput. Electron. Agricul-
[16] K. Bakirciog˘lu and N. Özkurt, “Classification of EMG signals using ture, vol. 200, 2022, Art. no. 107264.
convolution neural network,” Int. J. Appl. Math. Electron. Comput., vol. 8, [36] C. Maufroy and D. Bargmann, “CNN-Based detection and classification
no. 4, pp. 115–119, 2020. of grasps relevant for worker support scenarios using sEMG signals of
[17] M. Zanghieri, S. Benatti, A. Burrello, V. Kartsch, F. Conti, and L. Benini, forearm muscles,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man, Cybern., 2018,
“Robust real-time embedded EMG recognition framework using tempo- pp. 141–146.
ral convolutional networks on a multicore IoT processor,” IEEE Trans. [37] M. V. Narkhede, P. P. Bartakke, and M. S. Sutaone, “A review on weight
Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 244–256, Apr. 2020. initialization strategies for neural networks,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 55,
[18] P. Tsinganos, B. Cornelis, J. Cornelis, B. Jansen, and A. Skodras, “Deep no. 1, pp. 291–322, 2022.
learning in EMG-based gesture recognition,” in Proc. PhyCS, 2018, [38] N. Bai, Z. Wang, and F. Meng, “A stochastic attention CNN model for
pp. 107–114. rumor stance classification,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 80771–80778, 2020.
[19] A. Olsson, N. Maleševic´, A. Björkman, and C. Antfolk, “Exploiting the [39] F. Yu and V. Koltun, “Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convolu-
intertemporal structure of the upper-limb sEMG: Comparisons between tions,” 2015, arXiv:1511.07122.
an LSTM network and cross-sectional myoelectric pattern recognition [40] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic
methods,” in Proc. IEEE 41st Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2019, convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018,
pp. 6611–6615. arXiv:1803.01271.
[20] E. Rahimian, S. Zabihi, A. Asif, D. Farina, S. F. Atashzar, and [41] P. H. Chen and C. Y. Lee, “UAVNet: An efficient obstacel detection model
A. Mohammadi, “FS-HGR: Few-shot learning for hand gesture recog- for UAV with autonomous flight,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Auton. Syst.,
nition via electromyography,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., 2018, pp. 217–220.
vol. 29, pp. 1004–1015, 2021. [42] X. Zhang, Y. Zou, and W. Shi, “Dilated convolution neural network with
[21] M. Atzori, M. Cognolato, and H. Müller, “Deep learning with convolu- LeakyReLU for environmental sound classification,” in Proc. 22nd Int.
tional neural networks applied to electromyography data: A resource for Conf. Digit. Signal Process., 2017, pp. 1–5.
the classification of movements for prosthetic hands,” Front. Neurorobot., [43] M. J. Hasan, D. Shon, K. Im, H. K. Choi, D. S. Yoo, and J. M. Kim,
vol. 10, 2016, Art. no. 9. “Sleep state classification using power spectral density and residual neural
[22] E. Rahimian, S. Zabihi, S. F. Atashzar, A. Asif, and A. Mohammadi, network with multichannel EEG signals,” Appl. Sci., vol. 10, no. 21, 2020,
“Semg-based hand gesture recognition via dilated convolutional neu- Art. no. 7639.
ral networks,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Conf. Signal Inf. Process., 2019, [44] H. Ide and T. Kurita, “Improvement of learning for CNN with ReLU
pp. 1–5. activation by sparse regularization,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.,
[23] P. Gulati, Q. Hu, and S. F. Atashzar, “Toward deep generalization of 2017, pp. 2684–2691.
peripheral EMG-Based Human-Robot interfacing: A hybrid explainable [45] D. P. Kingma and J. L. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
solution for NeuroRobotic systems,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 6, in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2015, pp. 1–13.
no. 2, pp. 2650–2657, Apr. 2021. [46] S. Ruder, “An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms,”
[24] M. G. Asogbon et al., “Appropriate feature set and window parameters 2016, arXiv:1609.04747.
selection for efficient motion intent characterization towards intelligently [47] Z. Zhang and M. Sabuncu, “Generalized cross entropy loss for training
smart EMG-PR system,” Symmetry, vol. 12, no. 10, 2020, Art. no. 1710. deep neural networks with noisy labels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
[25] T. Farrell and R. F. Weir, “Analysis window induced controller de- Syst., 2018, Art. no. 31.
lay for multifunctional prostheses,” in Proc. Myoelectric Symp., 2008, [48] U. Côté-Allard et al., “Deep learning for electromyographic hand gesture
Art. no. 20125. signal classification using transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
[26] L.H.Smith,L.J.Hargrove,B.A.Lock,andT.A.Kuiken,“Determiningthe Rehabil. Eng., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 760–771, Apr. 2019.
optimal window length for pattern recognition-based myoelectric control: [49] A. Stango, F. Negro, and D. Farina, “Spatial correlation of high-density
Balancing the competing effects of classification error and controller EMG signals provides features robust to electrode number and shift in
delay,”IEEETrans.NeuralSyst.Rehabil.Eng.,vol.19,no.2,pp. 186–192, pattern recognition for myocontrol,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Apr. 2011. Eng., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 189–198, Mar. 2015.
[27] E. N. Kamavuako, E. J. Scheme, and K. B. Englehart, “Determination of [50] O. W. Samuel et al., “Intelligent EMG pattern recognition control method
optimum threshold values for EMG time domain features; a multi-dataset for upper-limb multifunctional prostheses: Advances, current challenges,
investigation,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 13, no. 4, 2016, Art. no. 0460. and future prospects,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 10150–10165, 2019.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 09:59:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.