

===== PAGE 1 =====

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS 1
Multisource Domain Separation Network for
Industrial Intelligent Monitoring in
Unseen Conditions
Zidi Jia , Member, IEEE, Lei Ren , Senior Member, IEEE, Zuo-Jun Max Shen, Member, IEEE,
and Laurence T. Yang , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Industrial time-series prediction is one of the crucial time-series prediction, multisource domain separation network
tasks of industrial artificial intelligence, which has been exten- (MS-DSN), supervised contrastive similarity.
sively adopted in intelligent monitoring. However, continuous
variations in the working conditions of industrial processes
I. INTRODUCTION
lead to continuous changing in monitoring data, resulting in
distribution shift. Industrial time-series prediction models may RECENTLY, the advancements in artificial intelligence
not be able to maintain satisfactory accuracy. Domain general- technology have made data-driven methods popular in
ization (DG) methods can effectively improve the robustness and
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) [1]. These methods only
generalization of the models for unseen or dynamic distribution
need to obtain information from monitoring data and can
data. However, existing methods have drawbacks limit their
applicability in practice. First, most DG methods are designed realize better performance, thus they have been extensively
for classification tasks and lack a general framework for regres- studied [2]. The widespread application of advanced artificial
sion tasks. Second, extracting domain-invariance may obscure intelligence technology has led to significant breakthroughs
task-relevant information, thereby degrading the prediction pre-
in many area of industrial manufacturing, such as predictive
cision. Third, DG methods are generally sensitive to extremely
maintenance [3], product life-cycle management [4], and smart
distributed data, potentially compromising the robustness. To
address these issues, a multisource domain separation network grids [5]. Industrial time-series prediction is a critical com-
(MS-DSN) is proposed. First, by constructing a DSN to separate ponent of these issues [6], and holds great importance for
the features into domain-private and -shared spaces, domain- ensuring safe, stable, and efficient industrial production [7].
specific information can be filtered while domain-invariant
Deep learning models are commonly employed to analysis
features are preserved. Second, a supervised contrastive loss is
industrial time-series [8]. While these methods generally per-
defined to preserve the domain invariant information related to
the label changing tendency in the domain-shared space. Finally, form well in controlled experimental settings, the presence
a directional risk extrapolation (DREx) method is proposed to of numerous uncertainties in complex industrial environments
represents the extreme distributed data. Experiments on two hinders their widespread practical application.
datasets, CMAPSS and N-CMAPSS, verify the effectiveness of
Industrial process conditions in IIoT are increasingly com-
our method.
plex and varying. It may lead to variations in the distribution
Index Terms—Directional risk extrapolation (DREx), domain of collected monitoring data, referred to as a distribution
generalization (DG), industrial intelligent monitoring, industrial
shift [9]. For instance, in a flexible manufacturing process,
the operational state of production equipment continually
fluctuates in response to varying manufacturing tasks. It poses
Received 27 May 2025; revised 24 September 2025; accepted 29 September
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research a challenge to the independent and identically distributed data
and Development Program of China under Grant 2023YFB3308000 and in assumption required by most models. Conventional time-series
part by the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Project
prediction methods may not be able to adapt to sudden changes
62225302 and Project 62173023. This article was recommended by Associate
Editor C. Zhao. (Corresponding author: Lei Ren.) in working conditions or gradual evolution processes, resulting
Zidi Jia is with the School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineer- in reduced reliability. While it is theoretically possible to
ing, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: jiazidi@buaa.edu.cn).
collect real-time monitoring data from the work environment
Lei Ren is with the School of Automation Science and Electrical Engi-
neering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China, also with Hangzhou for model retraining or fine-tuning, high-quality data collection
International Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou 311115, and labeling is prohibitively expensive and challenging in
China, and also with the State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Manufacturing
practical production settings. Unfortunately, most current deep
System Technology, Beijing 100854, China (e-mail: renlei@buaa.edu.cn).
Zuo-Jun Max Shen is with the Faculty of Engineering and the Faculty learning-based industrial time-series prediction methods face
of Business and Economics, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China this challenge. It makes these methods unreliable and difficult
(e-mail: vp-research@hku.hk).
to generalize [7], [10].
Laurence T. Yang is with the Department of Computer Science,
St. Francis Xavier University, Antigonish, NS B2G 2W5, Canada (e-mail: Currently, several methods have been proposed to address
ltyang@ieee.org). distribution shifts. Innovations in domain adaptation (DA)
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCYB.2025.3618124. have been proposed and implemented [11], [12]. For instance,
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCYB.2025.3618124 Li et al. [13] proposed passive multi-DA of deep neural
© 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License.
For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

===== PAGE 2 =====

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS
networks based on fuzzy rules, utilizing fuzzy systems to In this article, a multisource domain separation network
handle data uncertainty in DA even without access to source (MS-DSN) is proposed for solving the challenge of predicting
data. Jia et al. [14] proposed a DA method based on contrastive industrial time-series in unseen scenarios. The primary contri-
learning for domain-invariant prediction across domains, by butions can be outlined as.
representing the relationship between feature distribution and 1) A model-agnostic DG structure for industrial time-series
label changes. These methods eliminate the impact of domain prediction in varying and unseen condition, denoted as
shift by discovering domain-invariant knowledge between MS-DSN, is put forth in this proposal. In MS-DSN,
source and target domains. Nevertheless, these methods are private subspace and shared subspace are introduced for
effective only when unlabeled target data are accessed, leading each domain. By excluding domain private information,
to limitations in their generalizability across various practical domain-invariant information is captured.
applications. Many industrial applications have very high 2) A supervised contrastive similarity loss is defined to
requirements for timeliness, which makes data collection and improve the similarity of each source domain data in
model retraining challenging [15]. It is crucial to reduce the domain shared space, ensuring that all data within
the sensitivity of deep learning models to distribution shifts, the shared space exhibit similar label varying trends.
improve their generalization ability to unseen data, and per- 3) A directional risk extrapolation (DREx) method is pro-
form well in unseen conditions. Domain generalization (DG) posed to reduce the sensitivity of the prediction model
is a method to solve distribution shifts in unseen conditions to extreme distribution changes and enhance its overall
[16], [17]. By training the model in one or more source robustness to distribution shifts.
domains, high generalization to unseen target domains can
The rest of this article is organized as follows. The related
be achieved without accessing target data [18]. Up to the
works are discussed in Section II. Then, the methodology
present, various DG methods have been developed that excel
of MS-DSN is presented in Section III. In Section IV, the
in addressing domain transfer challenges in unseen conditions.
experimental results are presented and analyzed. Finally, the
For instance, Zhao and Shen [19] introduced a single-DG
conclusion is drawn in Section V.
network for mechanical fault diagnosis, guided by adversarial
mutual information. Xia et al. [20] proposed a depth sensing II. RELATED WORKS
adversarial DA method that uses perceptual loss to force the
A. Industrial Time-Series Prediction
target domain and source domain to have the same distribution,
which is used for fault diagnosis of industrial robot bearings Since most of the data collected in industrial intelligent
under different conditions. Despite recent progress, there are monitoring systems are sensor signals and control signals,
still many issues that need to be addressed. time-series prediction is a core task in intelligent monitoring.
First, to the best of our knowledge, most of the solutions to Time-series prediction methods based on deep learning are a
distribution shift so far are aimed at classification problems. promising technology for extracting and analyzing spatiotem-
Cross-domain methods for prediction and regression issues poral correlations between features in industrial time-series.
have not yet received much attention, especially in industrial These methods can identify and analyze these correlations,
scenarios. Many current studies on cross-domain learning providing a powerful means of understanding the complex
methods rely on techniques such as pseudo-label [21] or dis- relationships between different features of temporal data [7].
tribution assumptions [22]. However, assessing the reliability As demand for flexibility in industrial tasks continues to
of relevant metrics for these techniques in regression tasks can grow, manufacturing on mixed production lines involving mul-
be challenging. Second, basic distribution alignment is likely tiple, constantly changing processes is becoming increasingly
to obscure specific information related to downstream tasks. common. Consequently, the distribution of monitoring data
Because downstream task information may be irrelevant to is subject to constant change, which makes related moni-
inter-domain correlation. There is currently no feasible method toring tasks more challenging. Furthermore, industrial time
for analyzing industrial time-series under distribution shifts, data originate from a variety of sources, is high-throughput
particularly when the target data is not accessible. Therefore, and low-value intensive, and is highly dynamic. Traditional
studying general DG methods that can be applied to various methods struggle to effectively deal with the complexity and
issues is also a thorny problem that needs to be solved urgently. dynamic characteristics of industrial time data. Therefore,
Third, DG models may be sensitive to extreme distribution highly generalized, robust, and evolvable models are needed.
changes, resulting in satisfactory robustness not always being
maintained. Therefore, this article is to study a DG method to B. Domain Generalization
solve the problem of industrial time-series prediction under DG enables the model to maintain high robustness when
varying and unseen working conditions. As the targets of processing more widely distributed data by learning invariant
industrial monitoring tasks are typically fixed, these tasks knowledge across various domains. Let X represent the data
can be considered invariant. This means that the distribution and Y denote its corresponding labels. A domain, denoted
of features related to the predicted targets in the monitoring as D = {(x , y )}n , consists of data sampled from a joint
i i i=1
signals remains unchanged in the feature space, and features distribution P . Conventional methods involve acquiring a
XY
that vary with working conditions can be considered noise. prediction function f:X → Y within the hypothesis space
Therefore, the method described in this article is based on the through empirical risk minimization (ERM) applied to the
strategy of invariant risk minimization (IRM). training set D. However, when the training and test sets do not

===== PAGE 3 =====

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
JIA et al.: MULTISOURCE DSN FOR INDUSTRIAL INTELLIGENT MONITORING IN UNSEEN CONDITIONS 3
Fig. 1. Overall framework of MS-DSN. Autoencoders are used for representation learning in private space and shared space, respectively.
obey the assumption of independent and identical distributed, to standardize the alignment of features in different domains,
ERM is less robust and difficult to generalize, despite its such as IRM [24]. Krueger et al. [25] advocate for feature
high computational efficiency. Therefore, DG is proposed and invariance by minimizing the extrapolation risk among source
applied. domains, effectively diminishing the variance of the source
Given a training set S = {Sk}K containing K source domain risk. In industrial intelligent monitoring tasks, working
k=1
domains, Sk ∼ Pk , obeying different distributions Pk , the conditions may change very frequently, which can lead to
XY XY
objective of DG is to acquire a robust and generalizable predic- changes in the distribution of monitoring signals. Therefore,
tion function f from S through minimizing the expected error DG methods are required to improve the robustness of the
on any unseen target domain T , where the joint distribution monitoring model, with the IRM method being the most
PT is distinct from Pi for i = 1, . . . , K suitable for this purpose.
XY XY
Although there have been many related studies, most of
f = arg min E L (f (x) , y) . (1)
(x,y)∈T them are used for classification tasks (such as fault diagnosis),
and only consider aligning the features of the overall source
Numerous DG methods have been proposed, broadly
domain data features to reduce the differences between the
categorized into approaches based on data manipulation, rep-
domains. How to design a more universal DG method is an
resentation learning, and learning strategies [17]. Our primary
urgent issue that needs to be solved.
focus is on methods grounded in representation learning.
Domain adversarial training stands as a widely employed
III. METHODOLOGY
technique for acquiring domain-invariant representations, with
A. Multisource DSN
the domain adversarial neural network [23] serving as the most
frequently utilized method in this context. Explicit alignment Inspired by domain-separated networks [26] for DA, this
is a more direct approach, directly utilizing specific constraints article applies domain-private components and domain-shared

===== PAGE 4 =====

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS
information as possible is extracted by the encoders. During
model training, the data X (k = 1, . . . , K) of the kth source
k
domain are input into the domain private encoder EP and the
k
domain shared encoder ES , respectively, to obtain the domain
private hidden features HP and the domain shared hidden
k
features HS . After this, HS is input into the shared predictor to
k k
obtain the monitoring indicator Y . After HP is concatenated
k k
with HS , it is input into the domain private decoder DP to
k k
generate reconstructed data Xˆ . In our method, by maximizing
k
the diversity between domain-private and -shared hidden fea-
Fig. 2. Topology of the neural network structure of MS-DSN. tures HP and HS , domain-private features could be removed
k k
from HS and consistency could be maintained. Besides, the
k
effectiveness of feature extraction is ensured by minimizing the
components to gain domain invariant insights from multiple difference between the reconstructed data Xˆ k and the original
source domain data. Traditional DG methods typically involve data X k . Furthermore, by minimizing the difference among
aligning features between different data domains. While these HS across domains (in MS-DSN, it is realized by maximiz-
methods are effective and feasible in theory, they can retain ing the mutual information lower bound), the extraction of
significant amounts of noise shared between domains, which domain-invariant information is further ensured. Finally, the
can mask useful information. To address this issue, this article risk differences in different training domains are reduced by
introduces the concepts of domain-private and domain-shared minimizing risk extrapolation to reduce the sensitivity of the
spaces. For each domain, these two spaces are conjugate to model to a wide range of extreme distribution changes. The
each other and together they contain all the information in that trained domain shared encoder and shared predictor are models
domain. The domain-private space is unique to each domain, with high generalization ability to data distribution shifts.
while the domain-shared space is shared by all domains. Algorithm 1 shows the flow of the proposed MS-DSN.
Since this method is based on the assumption of IRM, it
Algorithm 1 Algorithm of Training MS-DSN
is hypothesized that information relevant to the downstream
monitoring task is contained within the domain-shared space. Input: Source data Dk = {X k,i , y k,i }n i= k 1 , k = 1, . . ., K,
By identifying a shared subspace that is orthogonal to the pri- Initialized shared encoder ES ,
vate subspace, the method can separate unique domain-specific Initialized private encoders EP, k = 1, . . ., K,
k
information and generate more meaningful representations for Initialized private decoders DP, k = 1, . . ., K,
k
downstream tasks. In this case, modeling of the downstream Initialized predictor P.
tasks can be performed in the domain-shared space to achieve Output: Trained shared encoder ES ,
high generalization. Trained predictor P.
MS-DSN utilizes parallel domain-private encoders and a 1: for number of iterations do
domain-shared encoder to explicitly represent domain private 2: Sample minibatch data X k ∼ Dk, k = 1, . . ., K
information and domain shared information. By maximiz- 3: Extract the shared latent representation: H k S = ES (X k ),
ing the difference between domain shared representation and k = 1, . . ., K
domain private representation, domain-specific information 4: Extract the private latent representation: H k P = E k P(X k ),
is filtered to obtain domain-invariant information related to k = 1, . . ., K
downstream tasks. It is to note that, given the based assumption 5: Predict Y k of X k : Y k = P(hS k ), k = 1, . . ., K, and compute
of domain-IRM, it is not applicable to heterogeneous DG L task by Eq.(12)
tasks. 6: Reconstruct X k : Xˆ k = D k P(concat(hS k , h k P)), k = 1, . . ., K,
Fig. 1 shows the framework of the proposed MS-DSN and compute the reconstruct loss L reconstruct by Eq.(5)
method. We believe that MS-DSN is applicable to a variety of 7: Compute the loss of diversities L diversity of h k P and hS k ,
DG tasks. Without losing generalization, we choose regres- k = 1, . . ., K, by Eq.(4)
sion task as downstream task. Assume there are K source 8: Compute the loss of similarity L similarity of {hS k }, k =
domains, S 1, . . . , S K. The topology of the neural network 1, . . ., K, by Eq.(7)
structure of MS-DSN is shown in Fig. 2. The model consists 9: Update ES with L ES = L diversity + L similarity + L task +
of a encoder layer and a decoder layer, with 1 domain L recontrust
shared encoder, 1 domain shared predictor, K domain private 10: Update E k P, k = 1, . . ., K with L EP = L diversity +
k
encoders, and K domain private decoders (corresponding to L recontrust
K source domains, respectively). The domain-private encoder 11: Update D k P, k = 1, . . ., K with L DP = L recontrust
and domain-shared encoders are utilized for the extraction of 12: Update P with L P = L task k
domain-private features and domain-shared features, respec- 13: end for
tively. The domain-shared predictor is employed for the
purpose of making predictions for downstream tasks. The Let HS and HP represent the shared and the private repre-
k k
domain-private decoders are used to reconstruct the original sentation of each domain, X and Xˆ represent the raw data
k k
data, with the objective being to ensure that as much effective and its reconstruction in the kth domain, and Y represent the

===== PAGE 5 =====

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
JIA et al.: MULTISOURCE DSN FOR INDUSTRIAL INTELLIGENT MONITORING IN UNSEEN CONDITIONS 5
B. Supervised Contrastive Similarity
A supervised contrastive similarity loss, L is defined
similarity
to reduce the difference of the shared representations, that is,
to obtain domain invariant representation. As shown in many
studies, the domain-invariant information extracted by many
methods is likely to contain a large amount of noise related
to shared representations [26], [27]. Simple extraction of this
information (just like domain adversarial neural network) may
lead to losing valuable information. Besides, these methods
Fig. 3. Structure of the module for each domain.
are effective in classification tasks, especially the alignment of
data distribution boundaries has significant benefits for the DG
predicted indicator. ES , EP, DP, and P are domain shared of classification methods. The regression prediction problem
encoder, domain private encoder, domain private decoder, pays more attention to the trend of label changes with features,
and shared predictor, respectively. The inference of MS-DSN so these methods may not always work.
consists of the following parts: Thus, L similarity based on supervised contrastive learning
is defined to enable the data in each domain converge to
8 HS = ES (X ) similar distribution in the feature space. We adopt the density
ˆˆˆ<H k
P = EP (X
k
) ratio assumption from van den Oord et al. [28] and define
ˆˆˆ:y Xˆ k k
=
=
P
D
(cid:0)
k P k
H
(cid:0)
S
co
(cid:1)
k n
.
cat (cid:0) H k S , H k P(cid:1)(cid:1) (2) a Th c e on lo tr s a s st f i u v n e c s ti i o m n ila is rit b y as l e o d ss o m n e th tr e ic fo w ll i o th wi l n ab g e a ls ss a u s m a pt m io e n t : ri t c h s e .
k k variation tendency of labels in various domains is positively
related to the variation of data distribution in the feature space.
The training goal is to minimize the following loss:
L acts on the domain sharing features, and its goal is to
similarity
obtain similar representations for samples with similar labels
L = L + αL + βL + γL (3)
task reconstruct diversity similarity in all domains
where α, β, γ are hyperparameters that control the interaction L
similarity
o ar f e th lo e ss lo f s u s nc te ti r o m n s s . f L o t r ask c , ol L la r b ec o o r n a st t r i u v c e t , t L ra d i i n ve i r n s g ity . , T a h n e d p L re si d m i il c a t r o ity r = − log X "P k(cid:44)i ex P p (−τ |y i − (cid:0) y k |) ˇ cosin (cid:0) ˇ H (cid:1) i S , H k S (cid:1) + ε #
trained on the shared representation generalizes better across i j(cid:44)i exp −τ ˇy i − y jˇ
domains since its input is not contaminated by aspects of the (6)
representation which are unique to each domain.
where cosin means cosine similarity and H is the encoding of
The data in each domain is projected in shared space and
all source domain data in minibatch. ε is the hyperparameter,
private space, respectively, and is analyzed in the shared and we let ε = 1e−5 in our experiments. In order to avoid
predictor. The module corresponding to the kth domain is
unnecessary computation, batch normalization is performed
shown in Fig. 3. To induce the model to produce such a split
on hS before L ’s computing. The loss function can be
representation, we define diversity loss, L , to encourage similarity
diversity further simplified to
the independence of these parts. L operates across
diversity
domains, fostering the extraction of distinct facets of the input L
similarity
by both shared and private encoders. The definition of L diversity 2P exp (−τ |y − y |) (cid:13) (cid:13)HS (cid:62) HS (cid:13) (cid:13) 3
involves a soft subspace orthogonality constraint between the = − log X 4 k(cid:44)i P (cid:0) i ˇ k (cid:13) i ˇ(cid:1) j (cid:13) + ε5 . (7)
private and shared representations i j(cid:44)i exp −τ ˇy i − y jˇ
L diversity = X K (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) h k p(cid:62) h k s (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) 2 . (4) B in y v m ar i i n o i u m s i fi zi e n l g ds th c i a s n lo o s b s ta f i u n nc si t m io i n l , ar sa r m ep p r l e e s s en w ta it t h io s n i s m . ilar labels
F
k=1
To ensure that the private representation retains as much C. Risk Extrapolation
information as possible and add generalization, a reconstruc- We hypothesize that the differences among source domains
tion loss L reconstruct is applied. The concatenation of h k s and h k p represent the changes we are likely to encounter, but that the
is reconstructed into Xˆ through the private decoder ensuring changes at test time may be more extreme in magnitude. Solely
the effectiveness of the encoder. A scale-invariant mean square using prediction bias (such as mean square error) to train the
error term is utilized to represent the reconstruction loss model may cause the model to focus too much on a certain
L reconstruct , which is applicable to each domain area, leading to model bias. This may render the model less
robust to distribution shift.
K
L reconstruct = X m 1 (cid:13) (cid:13)X k − Xˆ k (cid:13) (cid:13) 2 2 + m 1 2 (cid:0)(cid:0) X k − Xˆ k (cid:1) · 1 m (cid:1)2 (5) do T m h a e in re s fo p re re , ve r n e t d s uc m in o g dels risk from diff b e e re in n g ces ove b r e ly twe se e n n siti s v o e urc to e
k=1
extreme distributions. To this end, we use the idea of IRM
where m is the number of the sampling points of each sample. to improve the overall robustness by reducing the worst-case

===== PAGE 6 =====

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS
robustness. Krueger et al. [25] proposed a V-REx method
to realize risk extrapolation by minimizing the covariance of
predicted risks in each source domain. The form is as follows:
K
X
R (cid:17) δVar ({R , . . . , R }) + R . (8)
V-REx 1 K k
k=1
In regression tasks, the risk can be represented by prediction
bias. However, the performance of co-variate shifting is limited
when the model is misspecified, or the training data are limited
or does not include the region of the test distribution. In
particular, in our approach, both measures of DSN structure
and similarity loss reduce the information contained in the
extracted features, which may cause domain-specific informa- Fig. 4. Simplified diagram of the aircraft turbofan engine.
tion for many downstream tasks to be filtered as well. At the
same time, such prediction risk only considers the scale of the
TABLE I
bias of prediction, but not the direction of the bias. Therefore,
we need to consider a more “extreme” approach. Since the PROPERTIES OF C-MAPSS
specific information of each domain has been excluded from
the features extracted by the domain sharing encoder, we can
assume that {HS , . . . , HS } are identically distributed. There-
1 K
fore, we need to pay more attention to the overall distribution
boundary. Therefore, a DREx is defined, as
R (cid:17) Var ({R , . . . , R }) + ϕVar ({B , . . . , B }) (9)
DREx 1 K 1 K
TABLE II
where R and B are the risk and bias of prediction of X
K K k
DESCRIPTION OF EACH CASE OF EXPERIMENTS ON CMAPSS
1 X
Nk
R = |y − yˆ |2 (10)
k N i i
k i=1
1 X
Nk
B = exp (|y − yˆ | − ψ) + exp (|yˆ − y | − ψ) . (11)
k N i i i i
k i=1
The loss of the downstream task with DREx can be defined
as
1) CMAPSS: As shown in Table I, four sub-datasets are
X K contained in CMAPSS, which differ in terms of operating
L = R + δR . (12)
task k DREx conditions, fault modes and number of engines. The dataset is
k=1
partitioned into samples with a sliding window. The window
size and step size are 30 and 1, respectively. The maximum
IV. EXPERIMENT RUL value is 130. The training set of each case contains three
source domains. Therefore, this part of the experiment contains
In this section, the effectiveness of the proposed MS-DSN
four cases, as shown in Table II.
is evaluated through experiments on the remaining useful life
2) N-CMAPSS: N-CMAPSS consists of millions of mon-
(RUL) prediction of aircraft engines. The monitoring data,
itoring data points representing run-to-failure degradation
evaluation metrics, and detailed analysis of the experimental
trajectories under real flight conditions. The dataset captures
results, including performance and comparisons, are presented.
engine operations under two distinct failure modes: the abnor-
mal high-pressure turbine (HPT) mode and the more intricate
low-pressure turbine (LPT) mode. For DG experiments, sub-
A. Monitoring Data of Aircraft Turbofan Engines
datasets DS01-DS07 were chosen. Each sub-dataset represents
As shown in Fig. 4, aero-engines monitoring data are used different working conditions, leading to variations in the
in the experiment for RUL prediction. This dataset contains distribution of collected data. The specific selection of training
run-to-failure data of aero-engines. The RUL of an engine is and test sets is detailed in Table III. This task poses a more
defined as the number of remaining operational cycles during challenging aspect of model learning and representation. In
which the engine can continue functioning reliably. In this the realm of variable selection, four scene descriptors and
experiment, the CMAPSS [29] and N-CMAPSS [30] aircraft 14 metrics are employed for RUL prediction. The 18 chosen
turbofan engine degradation datasets are utilized. variables are outlined in Table IV.

===== PAGE 7 =====

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
JIA et al.: MULTISOURCE DSN FOR INDUSTRIAL INTELLIGENT MONITORING IN UNSEEN CONDITIONS 7
TABLE III the form of
DESCRIPTION OF EACH CASE OF EXPERIMENTS ON N-CMAPSS 8 N
ˆˆˆˆˆ< X e−(yˆj −yj )/13 −1, yˆ
j
< y
j
Score = j=1 (14)
N
ˆˆˆˆˆ: X e−(yˆj −yj )/10 −1, yˆ
j
≥ y
j
.
j=1
C. Baseline Models
TABLE IV This part provides a brief introduction to the baseline mod-
SELECTED MEASUREMENTS AND SCENARIO DESCRIPTORS els employed for DG. Each baseline method can be concise
OF N-CMAPSS described as.
1) Empirical Risk Minimization: DG through ERM is
accomplished by minimizing the empirical risk within each
source domain, mitigating the impact on model performance.
2) Domain Adversarial Neural Network: Domain adversar-
ial neural network (DANN) [23] employs adversarial training
for domain-invariant representations. The DANN framework
is utilized here specifically to obtain domain-invariant repre-
sentations of the source data.
3) Correlation Alignment: Correlation alignment (CORAL)
[31] minimizes the covariance shift among each source
domains for distribution alignment.
4) Mixup: Mixup [32] realizes DG by mixing data from
various source domains to generate new data to expand the
distribution of training data.
5) Variance Risk Extrapolation: Variance risk extrapolation
(VREx) [25] realizes DG by mitigating training risks and
enhancing the homogeneity of training risks.
B. Experimental Setting
6) Representation Self-Challenging: Representation self-
1) Model Details: The training process of each model challenging (RSC) [33] realize DG through an iterative process
consists of up to 50 epochs, with a batch size set at 256 of challenging and discarding dominant features activated
and a learning rate of 3e−4. Our network contains one sparse during training. This compels the network to focus on activat-
preencoder, one shared encoder, K private encoders, K private ing the remaining labels-relevant features, thereby improving
decoders, and one shared predictor (K is the count of source overall performance.
domains). The preencoder expands the dimensionality of the
data to 100 dimensions; the shared encoder, each private
D. Experimental Results
encoder and each private decoder are three-layer multihead
To assess our proposed method in a cross-domain scenario,
self-attention (four-head) with residual links; the shared pre-
we utilize labeled training data from the source domain
dictor is a two-layer perceptron (hidden layer dimension is
for model training, and evaluate its performance with test
128). The baseline comparison method, and the shared parts
data from the target domain, measured in terms of RMSE
of our proposed method all adopt the same network archi-
and score. To establish the effectiveness of our approach,
tecture details. To delve deeper into the model’s capabilities,
it is recommended to set different loss weights for balanced we compare it with classic transfer learning methods such
as DANN, CORAL, and mixup. Additionally, we include
multitask learning. However, for the sake of simplicity, we set
advanced methods like VERX and RSC for comparative anal-
the hyperparameters in all loss functions to 1.
2) Evaluation Metrics: The effectiveness of the proposed ysis. The experimental results presented are averages derived
from ten randomly repeated experiments, providing a robust
method is assessed by two metrics: root-mean-square error
evaluation of the proposed method’s performance.
(RMSE) and score metric. RMSE is defined as
The results of the comparative experiments on CMAPSS are
v shown in Table V and Fig. 5. It can be found that the perfor-
u n
RMSE = u t 1 n X (cid:0) yˆ j − y j (cid:1)2 . (13) mance of the proposed MS-DSN is better than all competing
j=1 methods in various unknown scenarios. The error of MS-DSN
is around 25, the maximum error of the other methods is
RMSE treats larger and smaller RUL predictions equally. around 30, and the maximum error of Mixup is even close
For practical applications, smaller RUL predictions may be to 40. DANN and CORAL are representative cross-domain
more detrimental to the system. A fractional metric is thus transfer methods based on distribution alignment. These meth-
introduced to impose more penalties on late predictions, in ods primarily emphasize the consistency of data distributions

===== PAGE 8 =====

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS
Fig. 5. Visualization of the RUL prediction results of FD004 test engine #248 by each method in case 1. The shaded region indicates the error margin
between the prediction and the actual RUL values. (a) DANN. (b) CORAL. (c) Mixup. (d) VREx. (e) RSC. (f) MS-DSN.
TABLE V
PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS AMONG MS-DSN AND SEVERAL STATE-OF-THE-ART METHODS ON CMAPSS
while overlooking the role of labels in multisource domain significant advantages over the second best method in these
alignment. It may obscure valuable information relevant to two cases. Taking FD004 as an example, the errors of our
downstream tasks. Therefore, their capabilities are limited in method are 50.66% and 14.29% lower than ERM and the
scenarios such as case 2 where is apparent distribution shift. second-best method, respectively.
Our method explicitly extracts domain-invariant information The results of the comparative experiment on the dataset
through an external parallel domain private encoder, and uses N-CMAPSS are shown in Table VI. Since the difference
labels to correct the features of the shared space. Therefore, in data distribution in different sub-datasets is not obvious,
our method enables the model to obtain better generalization the DG effects of various baseline models are not much
capabilities and can simultaneously preserve more informa- better than ERM. However, the performance of our method
tion relevant to downstream tasks. Furthermore, we also has obvious advantages. We believe this is because, on the
observe that DG methods do not always perform well on one hand, our method can filter out the influence of unique
relatively complex data due to large shifts in the domain. But information in each domain; on the other hand, our method can
MS-DSN can successfully generalize domain knowledge to enlarge the boundaries of data distribution and enhance DG
distant domains. For example, FD002 and FD004 are relatively capabilities.
complex sub-datasets, and various baseline models have rel- Generally speaking, MS-DSN can effectively extract invari-
atively poor generalization effects. However, our method has ant information from multiple source domains, making the

===== PAGE 9 =====

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
JIA et al.: MULTISOURCE DSN FOR INDUSTRIAL INTELLIGENT MONITORING IN UNSEEN CONDITIONS 9
TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS AMONG MS-DSN AND SEVERAL STATE-OF-THE-ART METHODS ON N-CMAPSS
Fig. 7. Visualization of the domain shared representation of MS-DSN and
the latent representation of DANN encoder. (a) MS-DSN. (b) DANN.
SCS,” “w/o DREx,” and “DANN1,” respectively. In particular,
“w/o SCS” refers to the model version for which without
supervised comparative similarity (replaced by the Euclidean
distance of the discrepancy), “w/o DREx” refers to the model
version for which without DREx, and “DANN1” refers to
Fig. 6. Case 1 visualization of domain-shared features and domain-private
features in each sub-dataset of CMAPSS. (a) FD001. (b) FD002. (c) FD003. DANN with supervised contrastive similarity and DREx. The
(d) FD004. results of the ablation study are presented in Table VII. While
the accuracy of our method is not consistently the highest in all
cases, it outperforms the version without a specific component
model have strong generalization ability, and the generalization
in most scenarios. Especially the comparison with DANN1
and accuracy are better than those of existing models.
shows that our MS-DSN architecture is of effectiveness in
filtering domain-specific information and gaining insight into
E. Visualization Analysis domain-invariant information. Thus, the effectiveness of these
Fig. 6 shows the t-SNE visualization of domain-private three components are verified.
features and domain-shared features in each sub-dataset of Besides, we verify the contribution of each loss function
the CMAPSS dataset in Case 1. As can be seen from the in MS-DSN framework. We named the three variants of MS-
figure, MS-DSN can effectively separate and decouple domain- DSN “w/o L ,” “w/o L ,” and “w/o L ,”
reconstruct similarity diversity
specific information and domain-shared information in the which represent the MS-DSN frameworks without loss func-
original data, thereby filtering out information in the data that tion L , L , and L , respectively. It can
reconstruct similarity reconstruct
is irrelevant to downstream tasks, thereby realizing DG. It can be seen that in the MS-DSN framework, each calculation goal
be seen from Fig. 6 that the distribution pattern of domain is very important. Removing any loss function will cause a
shared features in the feature space is related to the changing significant drop in performance. However, it should be noted
trend of the labels. that the results of these ablation experiments are better than
Besides, for the FD004 test engine #248 of the test set of those of ERM or even DANN because our framework has
Case 1, the domain shared representation of MS-DSN and more than one DG-capable component.
the latent representation of DANN encoder are extracted by
t-SNE and presented in Fig. 7(a) and (b), respectively. It can be
G. Sensitivity Analysis
seen from the figure that in the shared space of MS-DSN, the
In this part, we evaluate the sensitivity of the proposed MS-
distribution of features is related to the trend of labels; while
DSN to the weights of individual loss functions. We focus
there is no such correlation in the latent space of DANN.
on the loss functions of each auxiliary task in the MS-DSN
framework, namely L , L , and L . These
reconstruct similarity diversity
F. Ablation Studies
loss functions are relevant to the updating of the model. We
In this subsection, we verify the contribution of each com- conduct experiments on case1 of CMAPSS. For the weight of
ponent in MS-DSN to DG through ablation experiments on each loss function, candidate values of 0, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1,
CMAPSS. We named the three variants of MS-DSN “w/o and 10 are assigned, respectively. Fig. 8 shows the results of

===== PAGE 10 =====

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS
TABLE VII
ABLATION STUDIES OF MS-DSN ON CMAPSS
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Chen, Z. Song, and Z. Ge, “Variational inference over graph: Knowl-
edge representation for deep process data analytics,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 2730–2744, Jun. 2024, doi: 10.1109/
TKDE.2023.3327415.
[2] X. Zhou et al., “Spatial–temporal federated transfer learning with multi-
sensor data fusion for cooperative positioning,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 105,
May 2024, Art. no. 102182.
[3] L. Ren, Z. Jia, T. Wang, Y. Ma, and L. Wang, “LM-CNN: A cloud-
edge collaborative method for adaptive fault diagnosis with label
sampling space enlarging,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 12,
pp. 9057–9067, Dec. 2022.
[4] Y.-N. Sun, W. Qin, H.-W. Xu, R.-Z. Tan, Z.-L. Zhang, and W.-T. Shi, “A
multiphase information fusion strategy for data-driven quality prediction
of industrial batch processes,” Inf. Sci., vol. 608, pp. 81–95, Aug. 2022.
[5] W. Zheng and G. Chen, “An accurate GRU-based power time-
series prediction approach with selective state updating and stochastic
optimization,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 13902–13914,
Dec. 2022.
Fig. 8. Experimental results with different weights of individual loss for case [6] H. Jiang, S. Zhang, W. Yang, X. Peng, and W. Zhong, “Integration of
1 of CMAPSS. (a) Lrecontrust. (b) Lsimilarity. (c) Ldiversity. encoding and temporal forecasting: Toward end-to-end NOx prediction
for industrial chemical process,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2984–2996, Mar. 2024.
[7] L. Ren, Z. Jia, Y. Laili, and D. Huang, “Deep learning for time-series
the ablation experiment, which shows that the weights of each prediction in IIoT: Progress, challenges, and prospects,” IEEE Trans.
loss function have little impact on the performance of MS- Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 15072–15091, Nov. 2024,
DSN. This may be due to the large enough number of epochs doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3291371.
[8] J. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Zi, H. Zhang, and Z. Wan, “Causal disentanglement:
in our experimental setting. MS-DSN is more robust in this
A generalized bearing fault diagnostic framework in continuous degra-
regard. Besides, when the weight is equal to 10 (the loss dation mode,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 9,
function is given a larger weight), the performance of the pp. 6250–6262, Sep. 2023.
[9] L. Chen, Q. Li, C. Shen, J. Zhu, D. Wang, and M. Xia, “Adversarial
model does not drop significantly, which shows that each
domain-invariant generalization: A generic domain-regressive frame-
optimization objective does not have a negative impact on DG. work for bearing fault diagnosis under unseen conditions,” IEEE Trans.
In comparison, MS-DSN is sensitive to L . Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1790–1800, Mar. 2022.
reconstruct
[10] Q. Qian, J. Zhou, and Y. Qin, “Relationship transfer domain general-
ization network for rotating machinery fault diagnosis under different
working conditions,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 9,
V. CONCLUSION pp. 9898–9908, Sep. 2023.
[11] F. Huang, J. Fu, and L. Zhang, “Bilateral co-transfer for unsupervised
In this article, MS-DSN, a multisource DG method, is domain adaptation,” J. Autom. Intell., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 204–217, Nov.
proposed for adaptive industrial time-series prediction in 2023.
[12] Z. Jia, L. Ren, H. Wang, and Y. Laili, “A two-stage privacy-preserving
unseen conditions. The proposed MS-DSN projects data into
domain adaptation for industrial time-series prediction,” IEEE Trans.
domain-shared and -private parts to eliminate domain-specific Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2846–2857, Aug. 2025.
information; and uses supervised contrastive learning and [13] K. Li, J. Lu, H. Zuo, and G. Zhang, “Source-free multi-domain
DREx to improve the similarity of representations of data in adaptation with fuzzy rule-based deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans.
Fuzzy Syst., vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 4180–4194, Dec. 2023, doi: 10.1109/
each domain properties and reduce sensitivity to widespread
TFUZZ.2023.3276978.
extreme distribution changes. We conduct comprehensive com- [14] Z. Jia, L. Ren, and Y. Tang, “A contrastive representation domain
parisons between MS-DSN with several SOTA DG methods, adaptation method for industrial time-series cross-domain prediction,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3236–3245, Apr. 2025.
and the experimental results unequivocally demonstrate that [15] L. Ren, H. Wang, and Y. Laili, “Diff-MTS: Temporal-augmented condi-
MS-DSN outperforms various methods significantly, and has tional diffusion-based AIGC for industrial time series toward the large
satisfied robustness. model era,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 7187–7197, Dec.
2024.
However, our method may be invalid when the source and
[16] K. Zhou, Z. Liu, Y. Qiao, T. Xiang, and C. C. Loy, “Domain gener-
target data are heterogeneous. In future work, we will explore alization: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45,
DG methods for heterogeneous data. no. 4, pp. 4396–4415, Apr. 2023.

===== PAGE 11 =====

This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
JIA et al.: MULTISOURCE DSN FOR INDUSTRIAL INTELLIGENT MONITORING IN UNSEEN CONDITIONS 11
[17] J. Wang et al., “Generalizing to unseen domains: A survey on Lei Ren (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
domain generalization,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, degree in computer science from the Institute of
pp. 8052–8072, Aug. 2022. Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
[18] J. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Zi, and Z. Zhang, “Whitening-Net: A generalized net- China, in 2009.
work to diagnose the faults among different machines and conditions,” He is currently a Professor with the School of
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 5845–5858, Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Bei-
Oct. 2022. hang University, Beijing, also with the Hangzhou
[19] C. Zhao and W. Shen, “Adversarial mutual information-guided single International Innovation Institute, Beihang Univer-
domain generalization network for intelligent fault diagnosis,” IEEE sity, Hangzhou, China, and also with the State
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 2909–2918, Mar. 2023. Key Laboratory of Intelligent Manufacturing System
[20] B. Xia, K. Wang, A. Xu, P. Zeng, N. Yang, and B. Li, “Intelligent fault Technology, Beijing. His research interests include
diagnosis for bearings of industrial robot joints under varying working neural networks and deep learning, time-series analysis, and industrial AI
conditions based on deep adversarial domain adaptation,” IEEE Trans. applications.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–13, 2022. Dr. Ren serves as an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEU-
[21] T. Matsuura and T. Harada, “Domain generalization using a mixture RAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, IEEE/ASME TRANSACTION
of multiple latent domains,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34, ON MECHATRONICS, and other international journals.
2020, pp. 11749–11756.
[22] S. Sagawa, P. W. Koh, T. Hashimoto, and P. Liang, “Distributionally
robust neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Apr. 2020,
pp. 1–19.
[23] Y. Ganin and V. Lempitsky, “Unsupervised domain adaptation
by backpropagation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015,
pp. 1180–1189.
[24] M. Arjovsky, L. Bottou, I. Gulrajani, and D. Lopez-Paz, “Invariant risk
minimization,” 2019, arXiv:1907.02893.
[25] D. Krueger et al., “Out-of-distribution generalization via risk extrapola-
tion (REx),” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 5815–5826.
[26] K. Bousmalis, G. Trigeorgis, N. Silberman, D. Krishnan, and D. Erhan,
Zuo-Jun Max Shen (Member, IEEE) received the
“Domain separation networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
Ph.D. degree from the Department of Industrial
vol. 29, Aug. 2016, pp. 1–9.
Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwest-
[27] G. Kang, L. Jiang, Y. Wei, Y. Yang, and A. Hauptmann, “Contrastive
ern University, Evansto, IL, USA, in 2000.
adaptation network for single- and multi-source domain adaptation,”
He is a Chair Professor with dual appointments
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 1793–1804,
in the Faculty of Engineering and the Faculty of
Apr. 2022.
Business and Economics, University of Hong Kong,
[28] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
Hong Kong. He is an Emeritus Professor at the
contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748.
University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA,
[29] A. Saxena, K. Goebel, D. Simon, and N. H. W. Eklund, “Damage
USA, and an Honorary Professor at Tsinghua Uni-
propagation modeling for aircraft engine run-to-failure simulation,” in
versity, Beijing, China. His main research areas
Proc. Int. Conf. Prognostics Health Manag., 2008, pp. 1–9.
include integrated supply chain design and management, operations manage-
[30] S. Chatterjee and A. Keprate, “Exploratory data analysis of the N-
ment, data-driven optimization algorithms and applications, energy systems,
CMAPSS dataset for prognostics,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Ind. Eng.
and transportation system planning and optimization.
Eng. Manage. (IEEM), Dec. 2021, pp. 1114–1121.
[31] B. Sun and K. Saenko, “Deep coral: Correlation alignment for deep
domain adaptation,” in Proc. Comput. Vis. Workshops (ECCV). Amster-
dam, The Netherlands: Springer, Oct. 2016, pp. 443–450.
[32] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz, “Mixup: Beyond
empirical risk minimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
pp. 1–13.
[33] Z. Huang, H. Wang, E. P. Xing, and D. Huang, “Self-challenging
improves cross-domain generalization,” in Proc. 16th Eur. Conf. Com-
put. Vision (ECCV). Glasgow, U.K.: Springer, Aug. 2020, pp. 124–140.
Laurence T. Yang (Fellow, IEEE) received the
B.E. degree in computer science and technology
from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1992,
Zidi Jia (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
in pattern recognition and intelligent systems from
the University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada, in
the School of Automation Science and Electrical
2006.
Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China, in
He is a Professor with the Department of
2025.
Computer Science, St. Francis Xavier University,
He is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow with Bei-
Antigonish, NS, Canada. His research was supported
hang University. His research interests include deep
by the National Sciences and Engineering Research
learning, domain generalization, Industrial Internet
Council, Canada (NSERC), and the Canada Founda-
of Things, and industrial process monitoring.
tion for Innovation (CFI). His research interests include parallel and distributed
computing, embedded and ubiquitous/pervasive computing, and big data.