

===== PAGE 1 =====

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024 16129
Self-Supervised Time Series Representation
Learning via Cross Reconstruction Transformer
Wenrui Zhang , Ling Yang , Shijia Geng , and Shenda Hong
Abstract—Since labeled samples are typically scarce in real- NOMENCLATURE
world scenarios, self-supervised representation learning in time t Original time series.
series is critical. Existing approaches mainly employ the con-
m Magnitude of t.
trastive learning framework, which automatically learns to
p Phase of t.
understand similar and dissimilar data pairs. However, they are
constrained by the request for cumbersome sampling policies x Concatenation of t, m and p.
and prior knowledge of constructing pairs. Also, few works have r Dropping ratio.
focused on effectively modeling temporal-spectral correlations N Number of patches of x.
to improve the capacity of representations. In this article,
B Number of x in a batch (batch size).
we propose the cross reconstruction transformer (CRT) to solve
x ith x in a batch of x.
the aforementioned issues. CRT achieves time series represen- i
tation learning through a cross-domain dropping-reconstruction E i Projection of x i by convolutional neural networks.
task. Specifically, we obtain the frequency domain of the time E′ Projection of E by transformer.
i i
series via the fast Fourier transform (FFT) and randomly drop E [CLS] token for time domain.
T
certain patches in both time and frequency domains. Dropping E′ Projection of E by transformer.
is employed to maximally preserve the global context while T T
E [CLS] token for magnitude.
masking leads to the distribution shift. Then a Transformer M
architecture is utilized to adequately discover the cross-domain E′ M Projection of E M by transformer.
correlations between temporal and spectral information through E [CLS] token for phase.
P
reconstructing data in both domains, which is called Dropped E′ Projection of E by transformer.
Temporal-Spectral Modeling. To discriminate the representa- P P
tions in global latent space, we propose instance discrimination
constraint (IDC) to reduce the mutual information between I. INTRODUCTION
different time series samples and sharpen the decision bound-
aries. Additionally, a specified curriculum learning (CL) strategy TIME series analysis [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8] is
is employed to improve the robustness during the pretraining critical in a variety of real-world applications, such as
phase, which progressively increases the dropping ratio in the transportation, medicine, finance, and industry. With the suc-
training process. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate
cess of deep learning, various tasks in the field of time series
the effectiveness of the proposed method on multiple real-
analysis have achieved great performances, which include time
world datasets. Results show that CRT consistently achieves
the best performance over existing methods by 2%–9%. The series classification [3], [4], forecasting [5], [6] and anomaly
code is publicly available at https://github.com/BobZwr/Cross- detection [7], [8], [9]. However, since labeled time series are
Reconstruction-Transformer. usually difficult to acquire [10], [11], it is essential to study
Index Terms—Cross domain, self-supervised learning, time learning representations from time series data in an unsuper-
series, transformer. vised learning way. Self-supervised learning is an emerging
approach, which designs a pretext task and automatically
generates “labels” for supervision while minimizing effort on
annotation.
Existing works of self-supervised learning can be
Manuscript received 28 November 2022; revised 1 January 2023 and 7 April grouped into two categories: contrast-based methods and
2023; accepted 24 June 2023. Date of publication 21 July 2023; date of current reconstruction-based. Contrast-based methods [12], [13], [14]
version 30 October 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural
are the main-stream approach of self-supervised representation
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62102008. (Wenrui Zhang and Ling
Yang contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author: Shenda Hong.) learning for time series. They are mainly to apply a segment-
Wenrui Zhang is with the National Institute of Health Data Science, level sampling policy and construct positive pairs and negative
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China, also with the Institute of Medical
pairs. The model is then forced to maximize the similarity of
Technology, Health Science Center of Peking University, Beijing 100191,
China, and also with the Department of Mathematics, National University of positive pairs while minimizing the similarity of negative pairs
Singapore, Singapore 119077 (e-mail: zhangwenrui@u.nus.edu). in the feature space. For example, contrastive predictive coding
Ling Yang and Shenda Hong are with the National Institute of Health Data
(CPC) [15] conducts representation learning by using powerful
Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China, and also with the Institute
of Medical Technology, Health Science Center of Peking University, Beijing auto-regressive models in latent space to make predictions in
100191, China (e-mail: yangling0818@163.com; hongshenda@pku.edu.cn). the future, relying on Noise-Contrastive Estimation [16] for
Shijia Geng is with HeartVoice Medical Technology, Hefei 230027, China
the loss function in similar ways. Temporal and contextual
(e-mail: gengshijia@heartvoice.com.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3292066 contrasting (TS-TCC) [17] is an improved work of CPC
2162-237X © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:01:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 2 =====

16130 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024
3) To tackle the problem of distribution shift caused
by masking in existing reconstruction-based methods,
we employ a simple but reasonable “masking” method,
which is randomly dropping certain parts of data in time
and frequency domains. Instead of setting values as 0,
dropping discards the “masked” segments and preserves
the original distribution of the time series.
Fig. 1. Comparisons with previous self-supervised methods. “Encode” is 4) We evaluate the representations learned by our proposed
the encoder producing the representations of time series. “Temporal” and method on three datasets, and the results demonstrate
“Spectral” are time-domain and frequency-domain data respectively. Note
that our CRT achieves the best performance in terms of
that our CRT utilizes both temporal and spectral information, and captures
cross-domain dependencies. effectiveness and robustness, with a performance gain of
2%–9%.
and learns robust representations by a harder prediction task
against perturbations introduced by different timestamps and II. RELATED WORK
augmentations. Reconstruction-based methods [18], [19] focus
A. Self-Supervised Learning
on utilizing the long-term context information for the time
As an emerging research field, self-supervised learning has
series with an encoder-decoder architecture. The pretext task
drawn much attention, especially for image data and text
of these methods is reconstructing the original data, which may
be masked to enhance inference ability. With the success of data [26], [27], [28], [29], [30]. Self-supervised learning is to
manually design “pretext tasks” on unlabeled data, which is
Transformer architectures [20], [21], [22], a recent work [23]
a way to provide “supervised” information for deep learning
proposes a Transformer-based self-supervised learning frame-
models. The model is expected to capture inherent charac-
work for multivariate time series for the first time.
teristics among large-scale unlabeled data, and show a better
However, the existing approaches (including contrast-based
performance on downstream tasks compared to training from
and reconstruction-based learning) neglect to exploit the
spectral information and utilize the temporal-spectral cor- scratch [31].
relations. The frequency domain is another perspective of For text data, BERT [32] is a typical example of self-
time series data, and different frequency bands imply various supervised learning, which is designed to pretrain deep
bidirectional representations from the unlabeled text by joint
states [24], [25]. Besides, each type of method is constrained
conditioning on both left and right context in all layers. Due to
by its own drawbacks.
BERT’s great performance, multiple variations were proposed.
1) Segment-level sampling policy used in contrastive learn-
For example, SpanBERT proposed to mask random contiguous
ing may lead to sampling bias. The performance is also
spans, rather than random individual tokens [33]. ERNIE pro-
unstable due to the high dependency on the way to
posed entity-level masking and phrase-level masking, which
construct negative and positive pairs.
integrate phrase and entity-level knowledge into the language
2) The distribution shift caused by the masking process in
representation [34]. For image data, contrastive learning is
reconstruction-based methods leads to a gap between the
more popular to learn representations in an unsupervised way.
pretraining and fine-tuning phases. The current masking
Contrastive learning methods typically rely on discriminating
process sets parts of the time series as 0, introducing
manually constructed pairs through an InfoNCE loss [15].
noise to the training process and destroying the shape
InfoNCE maximizes the similarity between positive instances
of the time series.
and minimizes the similarity between negatives. The largest
To solve these problems, we propose cross reconstruction
challenge and difficulty is how to construct reasonable and
transformer (CRT) for self-supervised time series repre-
practical positive and negative sets to facilitate the model to
sentation learning. Schematic comparisons for traditional
capture similarities and differences among instances. Some
reconstruction-based, contrast-based, and CRT methods are
works propose to construct pairs via data augmentations meth-
illustrated in Fig. 1. Our contributions include.
ods [29], [35], clustering [36], [37], and so on. Contrastive
1) To simultaneously model the temporal-spectral informa-
learning is also applied to other fields, such as graph repre-
tion and discover correlations, we apply a Transformer
sentation learning [38], multimodal learning [39], and so on.
encoder on both time domain and frequency domain
However, contrastive learning heavily depends on constructing
data to automatically fuse cross-domain features. To ade-
positive and negative pairs, which makes the performance
quately exploit the spectral information, we introduce
less robust and unstable. Recent works have started to apply
the phase of spectral data in addition to the magnitude
reconstruction-based self-supervised learning on image and
to store more spectral information.
other data [40], [41], which are straightforward but show great
2) To avoid the instability occurring in contrast-based meth-
performance.
ods, we reconstruct the original data in temporal-spectral
domains based on the cross-domain representations.
B. Self-Supervised Learning for Time Series
In addition, we propose a specified CL strategy to
improve the robustness of the training process, which Research on self-supervised representation learning on
progressively increases the dropping ratio in the pre- sequence data has been well-studied, but representation learn-
training process. ing for time series still needs to be promoted. Inspired by
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:01:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 3 =====

ZHANG et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED TIME SERIES REPRESENTATION LEARNING VIA CRT 16131
Fig. 2. Framework of our CRT. For each time series, we transform it into the frequency domain and calculate the magnitude and phase as explained in
Section III-B. We then slice the data and randomly drop some sliced patches. The remaining patches are projected as three types of embeddings through
three CNNs (shown as arrows in the figure). Decorated with the prefixed [CLS] tokens (ET, EM, and EP) and summed with position embedding and
domain-type embedding, all embeddings are fed into a cross-domain Transformer encoder. For our pretrained reconstruction task, we feed all resultant
cross-domain representations into the decoder to reconstruct the original time, magnitude, and phase data. For downstream tasks, we condense E′ , E′ and
E′
P
(corresponding to ET, EM and EP) as the representation. T M
the well-studied self-supervised learning methods in computer cross-reconstruction method. The goal of our method is
vision and natural language processing areas, recent works to learn representations combining useful information from
mainly leverage the contrastive learning framework for time two domains. Generally, the model is first pretrained following
series representation learning [14]. The researchers design dif- our CRT framework and then transferred to the downstream
ferent time-slicing strategies to construct positive and negative tasks. In this section, we describe our CRT in detail. All
pairs with the assumption that temporally similar fragments important notations are shown in Nomenclature.
could be viewed as positive samples and remote fragments At first, we pay attention to the drawbacks of existing self-
are treated as negative samples [42]. Unsupervised Scalable supervised learning methods for time series data.
Representation Learning [12] introduces a novel unsupervised 1) The existing reconstruction methods for time series mask
loss with time-based negative sampling to train a scalable original data and reconstruct it. However, masking (set
encoder, shaped as a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) to zeros) can significantly change the original pattern
with dilated convolutions [43]. temporal neighborhood coding of the time series and bring many noises to the pre-
(TNC) [13] introduces the concept of a temporal neighbor- training process that would deteriorate the performance.
hood with stationary properties as the distribution of similar To tackle these problems, we propose the dropping
windows in time. Nevertheless, these time-based methods are approach, which is discussed in Section III-A.
sometimes unreasonable for long time series and fail to capture 2) Most representation learning methods for time series
the long-term dependencies [14]. Besides, the performance neglect the frequency domain, which is a complemen-
will substantially deteriorate when applied to downstream tary perspective to the time domain of time series. In
tasks containing periodic time series. Section III-B, we propose a novel way to better utilize
A recent work [23] proposes a Transformer-based recon- the spectral information and model temporal-spectral
struction self-supervised task for time series data for the first correlations.
time. This method masks part of the original time series data
Combining the above two modules, we propose our Dropped
by setting the values as zeros and uses a linear layer to recon-
Temporal-Spectral Modeling for time series and discuss it
struct the masked data. The results show that reconstructing
in Section III-C. In Section III-D, we introduce an effective
the masked data can help extract dense vector representations
progressive training strategy to improve the stability and
of multivariate time series and facilitate models to understand
capacity of our CRT.
contextual information. However, masking original data intro-
duces a gap between the pretraining stage and fine-tuning
stage, because it changes the original distribution of time series A. Dropping Rather Than Masking
significantly. In addition, all methods including contrastive
Masking parts of data and reconstructing them is a common
learning methods neglect an important characteristic of time
paradigm in self-supervised learning tasks [32], [40]. Inspired
series data - the frequency domain.
by this, some works mask the original time series by setting
the value of certain temporal segments to 0 and reconstructing
III. CROSS RECONSTRUCTION TRANSFORMER
these segments [23]. However, this may significantly change
The framework of CRT is shown in Fig. 2. Our the original pattern of time series and bring noises to the
CRT is a Transformer-based time-frequency domain representation learning process. Besides, it may cause a gap
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:01:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 4 =====

16132 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024
temporal and spectral information and model cross-domain
correlations.
The most common method to transform time series into the
frequency domain is the fast Fourier transform (FFT) [45],
which is a rapid implementation of the discrete Fourier trans-
form (DFT)
Fig. 3. Masking versus Dropping. (a) Given one time-series data, (b) masking
m
so
e
m
an
e
s
se
to
gm
se
e
t
n
s
ts
e
.
gments of values to zeros, and (c) dropping means to discard
F[k] = X
N−1
t[n]
(cid:18)
cos
(cid:18) 2knπ (cid:19)
− sin
(cid:18) 2knπ (cid:19)
i
(cid:19)
N N
n=0
k = 0, 1, . . . , N − 1 (2)
where t is original time series data, N is the length of t,
k is the index of frequency data, i is called imaginary unit
satisfying i2 = −1, and F is the frequency domain data. After
FFT, the original time series is transformed into the frequency
domain and is converted to a sequence of complex numbers.
However, these complex numbers cannot be used to train the
neural networks directly. Most of the methods considering the
Fig. 4. Phase versus Magnitude. (a) Given a time series, (b) reconstruction frequency domain attempt to store the spectral information
with phase tends to preserve the shape of the original data, and (c) while using the magnitude of the complex numbers. For any complex
reconstruction with magnitude tends to preserve the value of the original
number z = a +bi, where a and b are arbitrary real numbers.
data. All data are conducted min-max normalization. The Euclidean distance
between (b) and (a) is 1.62 and Euclidean distance between (c) and (a) is The magnitude of z is ||z|| = (a2 + b2)1/2. However, using
5.05. only magnitude to restore the complex numbers would cause
information loss. Because we cannot restore z only using ||z||.
between the pretraining stage and fine-tuning stage since it To tackle this problem, we propose a novel way to better
leads to distribution shifts. As shown in Fig. 3(b), masking utilize the spectral information rather than simply using the
significantly changes the shape and distribution of the original magnitude. We introduce phase φ(z) ∈ (−π, π] as follows:
time series. Different from images or text, the shape is
 b
a
m
d
n
e
a
t
s
e
i
k
r
m
i
i
o
n
p
r
g
o
a
r
t
t
e
w
an
o
th
t
u
e
l
a
d
d
n
o
d
b
w
r
u
i
n
n
n
s
g
i
t
q
re
u
n
a
e
o
m
is
p
e
a
p
s
t
e
t
r
e
i
f
n
r
o
n
t
r
o
m
fo
t
a
h
r
n
e
c
t
e
i
p
m
.
r
e
etr
s
a
e
i
r
n
i
i
e
n
s
g
[4
st
4
a
]
g
.
e
T
a
h
n
u
d
s
φ(z) =
 a
a
r
r
c
c
t
t
a
a
n
n
a
b
,
+ Sign(b) × π,
a
a
>
<
0
0 (3)
In this work, we choose to drop some segments of the time

Sign(b
a
) ×
π
, a = 0
series rather than masking them. Dropping discards certain 2
parts of the input time series, and feeds the rest of the data into where
the model. The difference between masking and dropping is  ||b||
shown in Fig. 3. In detail, we slice the input into patches with  , b ̸= 0
Sign(b) = b
the same length, and randomly discard patches in a probability  0, b = 0.
of r following:
Phase is another characteristic of the frequency domain. Intu-
(
True, p ≤ r itively, a complex number z can be regarded as a point P of a
Dropping = False, p > r (1) circle with a radius of ||z|| and the angle between O ⃗ P and the
positive direction of x-axis. With phase and magnitude, we can
where p is a random value following uniform distribution restore the full spectral information which is represented by
U(0, 1). In this way, the model receives segments of real the complex number z through
data without corrupted zeros portions. Adding corresponding
position information of undropped parts to the Transformer a = ||z|| × sin(φ(z))
model can maximally preserve the global context and capture b = ||z|| × cos(φ(z))
the intrinsic long-term dependencies. z = a + bi. (4)
In addition to complementing magnitude, the phase contains
B. Involving Spectral Information
more information relative to the shape of the times series.
When learning representations for time series, most of the We compare the information contained by phase and magni-
existing methods neglect to involve the spectral information tude by restoring the original time series only using phase or
of time series. The frequency domain provides another per- magnitude. In detail, we calculate the phase and magnitude
spective to discover the patterns for time series data. The of a time series and replace the phase or magnitude with a
spectral perspective can provide several characteristics of the constant vector. In both cases, we restore the complex vector
time series that are not easily acquirable in the time domain. following (4), and conduct inverse FFT to transform complex
Consequently, we attempt to explicitly input both time and vectors to the time domain. As shown in Fig. 4, we can see
frequency domains into the model to enable it to learn both that the original time series is more similar to the restored
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:01:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 5 =====

ZHANG et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED TIME SERIES REPRESENTATION LEARNING VIA CRT 16133
time series with the correct phase. This intuitively explains where x′ is the reconstructed input (including both dropped
the importance of phase information for the shape of time and undropped patches), and d is the dimension of x.
series data. When reconstructing the original data of both domains,
we hope the latent representations contain more sample-
specific information and less similar information to other
C. Dropped Temporal-Spectral Modeling
samples. Hence, we propose a simple instance discrimination
In this section, we introduce our Dropped Temporal-Spectral
constraint (IDC) module to remove redundancy and sharpen
Modeling. For a given time series data t, we first conduct
decision boundary. IDC maximizes the mutual information
FFT and convert t from the time domain to the frequency
between the representations and original input, and simultane-
domain. The obtained vector is a complex vector, of which
ously constrains the redundant information that other samples
we store both the magnitude and the phase as mentioned in
have in common. Also, we maximize the distance between E
¯′
Section III-B. Thus, the complex vector is transformed into i
and E where i ̸= j in latent space, that is minimizing
j
two real vectors m (magnitude) and p (phase) with the same
length. We then concatenate t, m, and p to get the input x = 1
L =
[t, m, p] of length L. IDC B(B − 1)
For the input x, we choose to drop parts of it as mentioned  
B
in Section III-A. Each of the sliced patches contains only × log X X esim ( Proj 1 ( E¯ i ′),Proj 2 ( Ej ))  (6)
one type of data (time, magnitude, or phase). After that,
i=1 j=1..B,j̸=i
we drop r × N (r ∈ (0, 1) is the given dropping ratio and
N is the number of patches) patches and use the remaining where B is the batch size, sim(·, ·) is cosine similarity
(1 − r) × N patches to reconstruct the dropped patches. For sim(x, y) = (x · y/||x||||y||), and Proj , Proj are two pro-
1 2
patches containing time information, we randomly drop them. jection heads to project E′ and E into the same latent
i j
Also, for patches containing frequency information (phase or space. The projection heads can be either a linear layer or
magnitude), we drop the corresponding pair of patches (phase a multilayer perceptron, and we use a two-layer perceptron in
and magnitude of the same segments of complex vectors). our experiments.
As explained in Section III-A, dropping the patches can reduce
the gap between the pretraining stage and fine-tuning stage
D. Model Optimization
because it does not change the shape of the original data.
Before the Transformer encoder, we add three CNNs to Combining the reconstruction loss and IDC loss, our final
extract local features for three types of patches respectively. loss is
We hypothesize CNN can help extract local features, and
Transformer can help model cross-domain information using L = L + βL (7)
Recon IDC
the local features. The patches x from time domain and
i
magnitude and phase are projected to three types of embed- where β is a hyper-parameter. By updating this loss, we hope
dings E respectively. We then add a different learnable [CLS] the representations learned by the model contain as much
i
token before each type of embeddings (the [CLS] before the sample-specific information as possible. Thus, the represen-
time, magnitude, and phase embeddings are referred to as tations are both informative and discriminable. As for the
E , E and E respectively). The three types of embeddings complexity, the FFT process is conducted before pretrain-
T M P
are summed with their corresponding learnable domain-type ing the model and frequency data is directly used during
embeddings and concatenated into a vector E ∈ R(N+3)×D, self-supervised training. Consequently, the increase in com-
where D is the dimension of the embeddings. Before fed putational complexity of optimizing L is negligible.
into the Transformer, E is summed with the corresponding However, it is difficult to reconstruct the dropped patches
learnable position embeddings. when r is initially set as a large value. As a result, we introduce
We input the whole E into the Transformer encoder and CL [46], which is a strategy that trains the model from “easy”
use the produced features to reconstruct the original data to “hard.” In detail, we set a relatively small dropping ratio
(time, magnitude, and phase). The learned representations r at the beginning of the pretraining stage, and increase r as
are used to reconstruct the original data of both domains the self-supervised learning goes. Formally, we refer to the
so that the Transformer encoder can automatically capture initial r as r min , final r as r max , and the number of epochs for
complementary information from both domains. increasing r as N epoch . r min and r max are hyperparameters, and
Formally, in a batch, there are B inputs x , i = 1, . . . , B. x should be tuned on the validation set. Then, the r for each
i i
is projected to E ∈ R(N+3)×D by CNNs, and E is projected by epoch i is
i i
Transformer to E′ i ∈ R(N+3)×D. We use E ¯′ i = (E′ T +E′ M +E′ P /3) (cid:18) (cid:18) i (cid:19)(cid:19)
for down-stream tasks. We concatenate each E′ with learnable r = max r , min r , . (8)
i i min max N
decoding tokens and feed them into the decoder to reconstruct epoch
all patches. The reconstruction loss is When the current epoch i is smaller than r × N , r is
min epoch i
L = 1 X L X d (cid:0) x′[i] (cid:2) j (cid:3) − x[i] (cid:2) j (cid:3)(cid:1)2 (5) e e q q u u a a l l t t o o r ( m i/ in N . Whe ) n . T r m he in n × , r N e r p e o m ch ai ≤ ns i e ≤ qua r m l a t x o × r N epo u c n h t , il r i th i e s
Recon L × d epoch i max
i=1 j=1 pretraining stage ends.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:01:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 6 =====

16134 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024
TABLE I help reduce pretraining time without influencing negatively
STATISTICS OF DATASETS the performance on down-stream tasks [40].
3) Data Processing: We use the fft function from the
numpy.fft Python library. For each channel of a time series
data, the original transformed sequence is a complex array
with the same length. Because of the symmetry, we preserve
the former half of the sequence and store the magnitude
TABLE II
and phase of this half sequence. After concatenating three
KEY HYPER-PARAMETERS OF DATASETS
sequences, the new sequence is with the double length of the
original time series. When we slice the sequence into patches,
we make sure that each patch contains only one type of data
(time, magnitude, or phase). We then randomly drop patches
in a probability of r (as mentioned in Section III-D) in the
ith epoch during pretraining. The patch length and dropping
IV. EXPERIMENTS hyper-parameters for each dataset are given in Table II.
4) Baselines: We compare our performances with the fol-
A. Experimental Setup
lowing self-supervised learning approaches, including the ones
1) Datasets: We conduct experiments on three publicly designed for time series specifically as well as the ones for
available time series datasets. general data.
a) PTB-XL [47], [48]: PTB-XL is an electrocardiogram a) Contrastive Predictive Coding [15]: CPC is to learn
(ECG) dataset with 21 837 12-lead ECGs of 10 s, where 52% representations by predicting the future data in the latent space
are male and 48% are female, ranging in age from 0 to 95. through autoregressive models. It constructs a contrastive loss
The sample rate is 500 Hz, and the length of each recording to maximally preserve the mutual information in the latent
is 5000. Our task is to classify time series into one of space between data in the present time step and data in the
the five classes including normal ECG (NORM), conduction future.
disturbance (CD), hypertrophy (HYP), myocardial infarction b) SimCLR [29]: SimCLR is a contrastive learning
(MI), and ST/T change (STTC). method first designed for image data. It constructs positive
b) HAR [49]: HAR is a human activity recognition pairs and negative pairs by conducting different data augmen-
dataset with 10 299 9-variable time series with a length of tation methods. We replace the original encoder architecture
128 from 30 individuals. The data are sampled from the with our encoder for a fair comparison. Also, we use the same
accelerometer and gyroscope with a sampling rate of 50 Hz. augmentations as previous work [52] for time series. The same
Our task is to classify time series into one of the six classes of data with two data augmentation methods form positive pairs,
daily activity, including walking, walking upstairs, downstairs, and the other pairs are negative pairs. The self-supervised
standing, sitting, and lying down. learning task is to maximize the similarity of positive pairs and
c) Sleep-EDF [48], [50]: Sleep-EDF is built for sleep minimize the similarity of negative pairs in the latent space.
stage classification. We use data from four subjects in their c) Temporal and Contextual Contrasting [17]: TS-TCC
normal daily life recorded by a modified cassette tape recorder. is a self-supervised learning method for time series data.
With a sampling rate of 100 Hz, we choose three channels: Similar to SimCLR, it transforms the raw time series data
horizontal EOG, FpzCz, and PzOz EEG. Each recording is a into two views by using weak and strong augmentations. The
24-h time series, and we cut them into 30-s segments. Our task task is a combination of a cross-view prediction task and a
is to classify time series into one of the eight classes including contrastive task. The contrastive learning task maximizes the
wake, sleep stage 1–4, rapid eye movement, movement, and similarity among different views of the same sample while
unscored. The overview of our adopted datasets is shown in minimizing similarity among views of different samples.
Table I. d) Temporal Neighborhood Coding [13]: TNC is also
All three datasets are randomly split into three parts, training a contrastive learning method for time series data. It utilizes
set (80%), validation set (10%), and test set (10%). In real- the stationary properties of time series data. Similar to SRL,
world scenarios, unlabeled data is much more common than TNC also constructs positive pairs using near segments, and
labeled data. To better simulate this situation, we use the constructs negative pairs using far segments.
whole training set to pretrain, and randomly select 20% of e) Time Series Transformer (TST) [23]: TST is a
the training set to fine-tune the pretrained model. self-supervised learning method for time series data by
2) Model Architecture: Our framework is an auto-encoder reconstructing the masked parts of original time series data.
architecture, which is composed of an encoder and a decoder. Different from our method, it neglects the frequency domain
Our encoder is based on a deeper Transformer (which is a six- and masks the original data by setting the value as 0, which
layer Transformer), and we add CNNs before the Transformer causes a large gap between the pretraining and fine-tuning.
as the local feature extractors. The CNN employed in our For fair comparisons, we implement these methods using
experiment is a 1-D ResNet-18 architecture [51]. Like the public code with the same encoder architectures as the original
recent work [40], our decoder is a shallower Transformer work (except SimCLR). The models are optimized using
(which has only two layers), because a lighter decoder can Adam [53]. The representation dimensions are all set to 256,
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:01:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 7 =====

ZHANG et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED TIME SERIES REPRESENTATION LEARNING VIA CRT 16135
the same as ours. All experiments are conducted on a server TABLE III
with five NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090ti GPUs. COMPARISON BETWEEN BASELINE METHODS AND OUR METHOD. THE
5) Evaluations: Linear probing is a popular method to eval- VALUE BEFORE ± IS THE MEAN VALUE OF MULTIPLE-TIME RUNS,
AND THE VALUE AFTER ± IS THE STANDARD DEVIATION
uate the self-supervised learning method. However, it restricts
the ability of deep learning since it cannot pursue stronger
and dataset-specific representations. Hence, we add a two-
layer fully connected neural network as the classifier after
the Transformer encoder and fine-tune the whole model. The
validation set is used to tune the hyper-parameters (such as
beta in L, batch size and learning rate) in fine-tuning stage,
and the model reaching the highest accuracy on the validation
set is saved and evaluated on the test set.
In the self-supervised learning stage, we randomly choose
five seeds and get five pretrained models. In the fine-tuning
stage, we also randomly use five seeds to fine-tune each of
the five pretrained models. Thus, we get 25 results per self-
supervised learning method per dataset.
We use ROC-AUC, F1-Score, and Accuracy to evaluate the
methods. ROC-AUC is defined as the area surrounded by the
receiver operator characteristic curve (ROC curve), the x-axis,
and the y-axis. Regarding the ROC curve, it is first computed
based on the predicted probability and ground truth of each
label directly without a predefined threshold, then defined as
the curve of the true positive rate versus the false positive rate
at various thresholds ranging from zero to one. Accuracy is
calculated for each class, as the ratio of the number of correctly
classified samples over the total number of samples. F1 score Fig. 5. Performance on three datasets when data is dropped or masked during
the pretraining stage. (a) PTB-XL. (b) HAR. (c) Sleep-EDF.
is the harmonic average of precision (the proportion of true
positive cases among the predicted positive cases) and recall
(the proportion of positive cases that are correctly identified).
As a multiclass classification task, we report average ROC-
AUC values across all classes, average Accuracy values across
all classes, and macro averaged F1 score. Reported numbers
are expressed in percentage values for better reading.
Fig. 6. Performance on three datasets with and without phase. (a) PTB-XL.
B. Comparison Results
(b) HAR. (c) Sleep-EDF.
We compare our CRT with baseline methods and show
the results in Table III. Our CRT outperforms all baselines
fine-tuning than masking, we compare the results on down-
in terms of ROC-AUC, F1-score, and accuracy. We also
stream tasks under the two setups. From Fig. 5, we see
observe that the results of CRT have a relatively small stan-
dropping always leads to better downstream performances,
dard deviation, which implies a more stable performance on
except for the Sleep-EDF dataset, where dropping yields a
downstream tasks. In addition, we notice that TST (another
slightly lower ROC-AUC but outperforms masking for other
reconstruction-based self-supervised learning method) also
metrics. This is because zeros brought by masking may create
obtains a relatively small standard deviation. The reason
wrong patterns for time series data, and dropping can tackle
might be that reconstruction tasks do not require constructing
this problem. Our dropping approach can keep the shape of the
negative and positive pairs, which is difficult and may cause
original time series, and reduce the gap between the pretraining
instability. It indicates that reconstruction-based methods may
and fine-tuning phases caused by the masking process.
provide a more stable way for self-supervised learning. One
2) Adding Phase Helps Frequency Learning: We also con-
baseline named Scalable Representation Learning [12] is not
duct a simple ablation study to support that phase can provide
included in our results, as it requires a much longer running
supplementary spectral information. We evaluate the model
time and we failed to produce its results in several days.
pretrained and fine-tuned with and without phase data under
the same experimental setups as our CRT. The results on three
C. Analysis of Cross-Domain Reconstruction
datasets with and without phase data are shown in Fig. 6.
More ablation studies and comparison experiments are We can see that adding the phase can help improve the final
conducted to further verify the effectiveness of our method. performance in terms of three metrics. This supports our view
1) Dropping Is Better Than Masking: To verify that drop- that magnitude is not informative enough to represent the
ping can better alleviate the gap between pretraining and frequency domain, and phase can complement magnitude.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:01:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 8 =====

16136 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024
TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF CROSS-DOMAIN AND SINGLE-DOMAIN. TIME REP-
RESENTS TIME-TO-TIME RECONSTRUCTION AND FREQ REPRESENTS
FREQUENCY-TO-FREQUENCY RECONSTRUCTION
Fig. 8. Performance of three cross-domain reconstruction methods. (a)
ROC-AUC of all five classes on PTB-XL. (b) Accuracy on Sleep-EDF when
the ratio of the training set used for fine-tuning is 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.8.
TABLE V
COMPARISONS OF THREE KINDS OF CROSS-DOMAIN RECONSTRUC-
TION. T2F REPRESENTS TIME-TO-FREQUENCY AND F2T REPRESENTS
FREQUENCY-TO-TIME
Fig. 7. Performance when using time domain, frequency domain, and both
domains. (a) ROC-AUC of all five classes on PTB-XL. (b) Accuracy on
Sleep-EDF when the ratio of the training set used for fine-tuning is 0.2, 0.4,
0.6, and 0.8.
3) Cross-Domain Is Better Than Single-Domain: We com-
pare our method with the trivial single-domain reconstruction
tasks. After conducting time-domain and frequency-domain
Fig. 9. Performance on three datasets with and without CL. (a) PTB-XL.
(phase and magnitude) reconstruction tasks respectively,
(b) HAR. (c) Sleep-EDF.
we fine-tune the models using the corresponding domain’s
data. As shown in Table IV, CRT performs best in terms a) Time-to-Frequency Reconstruction (T2F): with only
of all 3 metrics. The ROC-AUCs of all five classes on the time-domain part of E fed into the Transformer encoder,
PTB-XL datasets are shown in Fig. 7(a). We can see that we use the encoded features to reconstruct the dropped original
cross-domain representations help improve performance in all frequency-domain data (including phase and magnitude).
classes. This is because some abnormalities of ECGs can be b) Frequency-to-Time Reconstruction (F2T): contrary to
more easily observed from the perspective of the frequency T2F, we input the frequency-domain part of E and reconstruct
domain. Fig. 7(b) shows the performance on the Sleep-EDF the dropped time-domain data. We used the same inputs for
dataset under different training sizes. We give the results when fine-tuning to only evaluate the cross-reconstruction tasks.
20%, 40%, 60%, and 80% of the training set is used for fine- As shown in Table V, our complete cross-domain solution
tuning. The results show that by combining two domains, our outperforms the other two methods on three datasets. We also
cross-domain representations can yield higher accuracy under give the results of all five classes on the PTB-XL dataset
different ratios. [Fig. 8(a)], and the accuracy on the Sleep-EDF dataset under
All results support our hypothesis that learning from two four training set ratios [Fig. 8(b)]. From Fig. 8(a), we can
domains can yield more informative representations than from see CRT outperforms others on all classes, especially on
a single domain. This is because some patterns of the fre- “MI” (11.6% higher than F2T and 4.7% higher than T2F).
quency domain can complement the temporal patterns. Also, In Fig. 8(b), CRT also performs better, and T2F performs
the cross-domain Transformer encoder can fuse different types similar to F2T.
of features, and extract useful and complementary patterns Our CRT adopts Transformer as part of our encoder to fuse
from both domains. the embeddings from different domains. The representations
In addition, we notice that in all three datasets, using the obtained from the Transformer encoder contain information of
time domain yields better performance compared with using both time domain and frequency domain, which benefits the
the frequency domain. This may be because the patterns reconstruction as well as the downstream tasks. T2F and F2T,
of the time domain are more direct for neural networks to on the other hand, only capture a single-direction relationship
discover, and the three classification tasks are strongly related rather than a mutual relationship. It is intuitive that CRT can
to these patterns. However, adding the frequency domain can produce more semantic representations, and the experiment
supplement some patterns, leading to better performance. results will prove it.
4) Exploring Cross-Domain Learning: We explore cross- 5) CL and IDC Help Learning Cross-Domain Represen-
domain learning with two experiments: tations: We conduct another ablation study to verify the
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:01:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 9 =====

ZHANG et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED TIME SERIES REPRESENTATION LEARNING VIA CRT 16137
of our framework. For future work, we would adapt our
framework to the out-of-distribution scenarios and address
more challenging problems [54].
REFERENCES
Fig. 10. Performance on three datasets with and without IDC. (a) PTB-XL.
(b) HAR. (c) Sleep-EDF. [1] Q. Tan et al., “Explainable uncertainty-aware convolutional recurrent
neural network for irregular medical time series,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 4665–4679, Oct. 2021.
[2] F. M. Bianchi, S. Scardapane, S. Løkse, and R. Jenssen, “Reservoir
computing approaches for representation and classification of multivari-
ate time series,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 5,
pp. 2169–2179, May 2021.
[3] Y. Huang, G. G. Yen, and V. S. Tseng, “Snippet policy network V2:
Knee-guided neuroevolution for multi-lead ECG early classification,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Jul. 11, 2022, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3187741.
[4] T. Bradde, G. Fracastoro, and G. C. Calafiore, “Multiclass sparse
centroids with application to fast time series classification,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Nov. 12, 2021, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3124300.
Fig. 11. (a) Three reconstructed cases (the “Reconstructed” row) from
[5] W. Zheng and J. Hu, “Multivariate time series prediction based
PTB-XL, (b) HAR, and (c) Sleep-EDF. “Original” represents the original time
on temporal change information learning method,” IEEE Trans.
series, and “Dropped input” represents the time series after being dropped.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Jan. 4, 2022, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3137178.
effectiveness of CL and IDC, and show the results in [6] K. Bandara, C. Bergmeir, and H. Hewamalage, “LSTM-MSNet: Lever-
aging forecasts on sets of related time series with multiple seasonal
Figs. 9 and 10.
patterns,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 4,
As we expect, these two modules facilitate learning cross- pp. 1586–1599, Apr. 2021.
domain representations. CL helps the reconstruction tasks and [7] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C. Foo, “An evalu-
ation of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series,”
improves the performance on downstream tasks. CL gives a
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2508–2517,
progressively increasing dropping ratio rather than a constant Jun. 2022.
large dropping ratio, which helps better reconstruct the original [8] S. Benkabou, K. Benabdeslem, V. Kraus, K. Bourhis, and B. Canitia,
“Local anomaly detection for multivariate time series by temporal
data. As a regularization, IDC minimizes the mutual infor-
dependency based on Poisson model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
mation between different samples which helps Transformer Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6701–6711, Nov. 2022.
extract more discriminable patterns. It is worth noting that [9] Q. Chen, A. Zhang, T. Huang, Q. He, and Y. Song, “Imbalanced dataset-
IDC is not a contrastive loss, since it does not minimize the based echo state networks for anomaly detection,” Neural Comput. Appl.,
vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 3685–3694, Apr. 2020.
distance of any pair of samples. It only minimizes common
[10] A. Hyvarinen and H. Morioka, “Unsupervised feature extraction by
information of all time series. time-contrastive learning and nonlinear ICA,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
In Fig. 11, we illustrate three reconstructed cases with a Process. Syst., vol. 29, 2016, pp. 1–9.
0.7 dropping ratio. We see that the model almost reconstructs [11] X. Lan, D. Ng, S. Hong, and M. Feng, “Intra-inter subject
self-supervised learning for multivariate cardiac signals,” 2021,
the trend of dropped inputs with such a high dropping ratio,
arXiv:2109.08908.
especially for the ECG case from the PTB-XL dataset. The [12] J.-Y. Franceschi, A. Dieuleveut, and M. Jaggi, “Unsupervised scalable
reason for the well-performed ECG reconstruction might be representation learning for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 1–12.
because ECG is periodic and there are abundant similar
[13] S. Tonekaboni, D. Eytan, and A. Goldenberg, “Unsupervised representa-
patterns in the time series. Such amazing reconstruction per- tion learning for time series with temporal neighborhood coding,” 2021,
formance also proves that our cross-domain representations arXiv:2106.00750.
[14] L. Yang and S. Hong, “Unsupervised time-series representation learning
are highly informative and sample-specific.
with iterative bilinear temporal-spectral fusion,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 25038–25054.
V. CONCLUSION [15] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748.
In this work, we propose CRT, a cross-domain recon-
[16] M. Gutmann and A. Hyvärinen, “Noise-contrastive estimation: A new
struction framework based on Transformer for self-supervised estimation principle for unnormalized statistical models,” in Proc. 13th
representations learning of time series data. We note that the Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., vol. 9, Y. W. Teh and M. Titterington,
Eds. Sardinia, Italy: Chia Laguna Resort, May 2010, pp. 297–304.
existing self-supervised learning methods neglect to utilize
[17] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
the spectral information and temporal-spectral correlations of
contextual contrasting,” in Proc. 30th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.
time series. Moreover, existing “masking”-based methods for (IJCAI), Z.-H. Zhou, Ed., Aug. 2021, pp. 2352–2359.
reconstruction tasks tend to significantly change the original [18] G. Liu et al., “Medical-VLBERT: Medical visual language BERT for
COVID-19 CT report generation with alternate learning,” IEEE Trans.
pattern of time series, which would lead to the distribution
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 9, pp. 3786–3797, Sep. 2021.
shifts between pretraining and fine-tuning processes. To tackle
[19] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
these problems in a unified way, we propose our cross-domain detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
reconstruction framework which outperforms existing methods Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
[20] Q. Song, B. Sun, and S. Li, “Multimodal sparse transformer network
on three widely-used datasets. In addition, we conduct various
for audio-visual speech recognition,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
experiments to verify the effectiveness of each component Syst., early access, Apr. 12, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3163771.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:01:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 10 =====

16138 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024
[21] N. Zhang, “Learning adversarial transformer for symbolic music gen- [46] Y. Bengio, J. Louradour, R. Collobert, and J. Weston, “Curriculum
eration,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, learning,” in Proc. 26th Annu. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2009, pp. 41–48.
pp. 1754–1763, Apr. 2020. [47] P. Wagner et al., “PTB-XL, a large publicly available electrocardiogra-
[22] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for phy dataset,” Sci. Data, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–15, May 2020.
long sequence time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI, 2021, [48] A. L. Goldberger et al., “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet:
pp. 11106–11115. Components of a new research resource for complex physiologic sig-
[23] G. Zerveas, S. Jayaraman, D. Patel, A. Bhamidipaty, and C. Eickhoff, nals,” Circulation, vol. 101, no. 23, pp. e215–e220, Jun. 2000.
“A transformer-based framework for multivariate time series represen- [49] D. Anguita, A. Ghio, L. Oneto, X. P. Perez, and J. L. R. Ortiz, “A public
tation learning,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery domain dataset for human activity recognition using smartphones,” in
Data Mining, Aug. 2021, pp. 2114–2124. Proc. 21st Int. Eur. Symp. Artif. Neural Netw., Comput. Intell. Mach.
[24] R. Nawaz, H. Nisar, and Y. V. Voon, “The effect of music on human Learn., 2013, pp. 437–442.
brain; frequency domain and time series analysis using electroencephalo- [50] B. Kemp, A. H. Zwinderman, B. Tuk, H. A. C. Kamphuisen, and
gram,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 45191–45205, 2018. J. J. L. Oberye, “Analysis of a sleep-dependent neuronal feedback loop:
[25] M. Rhif, A. B. Abbes, I. Farah, B. Martínez, and Y. Sang, “Wavelet trans- The slow-wave microcontinuity of the EEG,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
form application for/in non-stationary time-series analysis: A review,” vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 1185–1194, Sep. 2000.
Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 7, p. 1345, Mar. 2019. [51] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
[26] E. L. Denton et al., “Unsupervised learning of disentangled represen- image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
tations from video,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
2017, pp. 1–12. [52] E. Eldele et al., “An attention-based deep learning approach for sleep
[27] Z. Yang, H. Yu, Y. He, W. Sun, Z. Mao, and A. Mian, “Fully stage classification with single-channel EEG,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
convolutional network-based self-supervised learning for semantic seg- Rehabil. Eng., vol. 29, pp. 809–818, 2021.
mentation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., pp. 1–11, 2022. [53] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
[28] X. Wang and A. Gupta, “Unsupervised learning of visual representations 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
using videos,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015, [54] L. Yang et al., “Diffusion models: A comprehensive survey of methods
pp. 2794–2802. and applications,” 2022, arXiv:2209.00796.
[29] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “Work for contrastive
learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Wenrui Zhang received the bachelor’s degree in
in Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 119, Jul. 2020, 2021 and the master’s degree from the National
pp. 1597–1607. University of Singapore (NUS), Singapore, in 2023.
[30] C. Liu, Y. Yao, D. Luo, Y. Zhou, and Q. Ye, “Self-supervised He was working with the Institute of Medical
motion perception for spatiotemporal representation learning,” IEEE Technology, Health Science Center, Peking Univer-
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Mar. 31, 2022, doi: sity, Beijing, China, and the National Institute of
10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3160860. Health Data Science of Peking University, Beijing.
[31] L. Yang and S. Hong, “Omni-granular ego-semantic propagation for He is working with Huawei Technologies Com-
self-supervised graph representation learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. pany Ltd., Hangzhou, China. His research interests
Learn., 2022, pp. 25022–25037. include deep learning for temporal data (especially
[32] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training temporal medical data), representation learning, and
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018, transfer learning.
arXiv:1810.04805.
[33] M. Joshi, D. Chen, Y. Liu, D. S. Weld, L. Zettlemoyer, and O. Levy,
Ling Yang is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
“SpanBERT: Improving pre-training by representing and predicting
with Peking University (PKU), Beijing, China.
spans,” Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, vol. 8, pp. 64–77, Dec. 2020.
He is working with the Institute of Medical Tech-
[34] Z. Zhang, X. Han, Z. Liu, X. Jiang, M. Sun, and Q. Liu, “ERNIE: nology, Health Science Center, Peking University,
Enhanced language representation with informative entities,” 2019, Beijing, China, and the National Institute of Health
arXiv:1905.07129. Data Science of Peking University, Beijing. His
[35] X. Chen, H. Fan, R. Girshick, and K. He, “Improved baselines with research interests include graph machine learning,
momentum contrastive learning,” 2020, arXiv:2003.04297. representation learning, and generative modeling.
[36] M. Caron, P. Bojanowski, A. Joulin, and M. Douze, “Deep clustering for Dr. Yang serves as a Reviewer for IEEE TRANS-
unsupervised learning of visual features,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. ACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE
Vis. (ECCV), 2018, pp. 132–149. INTELLIGENCE (TPAMI), NeurIPS, ICML, CVPR,
[37] M. Caron, I. Misra, J. Mairal, P. Goyal, P. Bojanowski, and A. Joulin, KDD, and AAAI.
“Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assign-
ments,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020,
Shijia Geng received the bachelor’s degree in neu-
pp. 9912–9924.
roscience and the master’s degree in biomedical
[38] Y. Zheng et al., “Toward graph self-supervised learning with contrastive engineering from the University of Miami, Coral
adjusted zooming,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Gables, FL, USA, in 2011 and 2014, respectively.
Nov. 10, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3216630. She was at the Data Science and Computa-
[39] H. Zhang, J. Y. Koh, J. Baldridge, H. Lee, and Y. Yang, “Cross-modal tion Institute, University of Miami, participating in
contrastive learning for text-to-image generation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF research and development projects such as signal
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 833–842. processing, machine learning, and deep learning.
[40] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked She is currently working with Heartvoice Medical
autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Technology, Hefei, China. She is doing research in
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 15979–15988. algorithms.
[41] J. Jiang, J. Chen, and Y. Guo, “A dual-masked auto-encoder for robust
motion capture with spatial–temporal skeletal token completion,” in
Shenda Hong is currently an Assistant Professor
Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022, pp. 5123–5131.
with the National Institute of Health Data Sci-
[42] Z. Yue et al., “TS2Vec: Towards universal representation of time series,” ence, Peking University, Beijing, China. His research
2021, arXiv:2106.10466. interests include data mining and artificial intelli-
[43] A. Van Den Oord et al., “WaveNet: A generative model for raw audio,” gence for real-world healthcare data, especially deep
SSW, vol. 125, p. 2, Sep. 2016. learning for temporal medical data-such as temporal
[44] L. Ye and E. Keogh, “Time series shapelets: A new primitive for data events, time series (e.g., longitudinal data, electronic
mining,” in Proc. 15th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data health records, and claims data), and physiological
Mining, Jun. 2009, pp. 947–956. signals (e.g., ECG, EEG, and PSG).
[45] A. V. Oppenheim, A. S. Willsky, and S. H. Nawab, Signals & System, Dr. Hong serves as an Associate Editor for Health
2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1996. Data Science.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:01:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.