

===== PAGE 1 =====

414 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 37, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Time Series Classification Based on
Supervised Contrastive Learning
and Homoscedastic Uncertainty
Tao Zhang , Ke Li , Member, IEEE, and Shaofan Wang
Abstract—In recent years, contrastive learning (CL) frame- depend on manually crafted features [7], [8], requiring special-
works have been widely applied to multivariate time series ized knowledge for feature extraction. However, this reliance
classification (MTSC) tasks. However, existing methods lack task- leads to performance differences due to varying feature extrac-
specific guidance, leading to limitations in fully capturing the
tion methods and their limited ability to capture deep-level
complex dynamics and invariant representations in time series
information [9]. Modern MTSC methods increasingly utilize
data. Motivated by the auxiliary tasks in multitask learning
(MTL) and to fully utilize the rich frequency-domain information deep learning architectures [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15].
of time series data, we propose a novel time series classification These models automatically extract features from raw data
framework, uncertainty-based time–frequency supervised CL (U- through neural networks, enabling the discovery of complex
TFSCL). This framework uses SCL in the time and frequency
patterns. However, the majority of current MTSC methods that
domains and time–frequency consistency as auxiliary tasks to
use only instance-level labels and rely on the cross-entropy
improve the primary task of using only instance-level labels for
loss function exhibit two critical limitations. First, their deci-
time series classification. Furthermore, inspired by the homo-
geneous uncertainty in MTL, we derive a novel uncertainty sion boundaries are prone to overfitting on noisy labels due
loss function, which automatically adjusts the weights according to the sensitivity of the loss function to mislabeled samples
to the degree of uncertainty of different tasks to optimize the [16], [17], [18]. Second, the focus on learning discriminative
learning and prediction process of the model. The proposed
features neglects the extraction of invariant temporal patterns,
framework is evaluated on MTSC tasks, including human activity
resulting in suboptimal generalization performance across
recognition (HAR), air writing, and gesture recognition. In
addition, we create a human–drone interaction (HDI) dataset unseen data distributions [19].
consisting of 20 subjects and conduct real-world experiments The scarcity of high-quality labels in time series domains
to evaluate the proposed framework. The extensive experiments poses a significant challenge to model training. For instance,
conducted in various settings verify the effectiveness of the clinical time series data (e.g., ECG, EEG) require expert
proposed framework.
physician annotations, but the labeling process remains scarce
Index Terms—Multitask learning (MTL), multivariate time due to data sensitivity and prohibitive costs. In addition,
series classification (MTSC), supervised contrastive learning labels may contain noise from doctors’ differing diagnoses
(SCL). or equipment errors, affecting disease feature learning [20].
I. INTRODUCTION Contrastive learning (CL) can learn invariant representations
TIME series data exist in many real-world scenarios, by comparing different views of input samples, thereby reduc-
ing reliance on high-quality labels and mitigating overfitting
including wind forecasting [1], stock forecasting [2],
induced by noisy labels [21]. It divides the input samples
human activity recognition (HAR) [3], industrial fault diagno-
into positive and negative ones and learns representations
sis [4], [5], and healthcare [6]. Such continuous data represent
from the time series data by maximizing the similarity within
states or events at points in time, making them ideal for ana-
positive pairs and minimizing the similarity within negative
lyzing trends, patterns, and anomalies. The key to analyzing
pairs. A typical framework is SimCLR [22], which uses
time series data is to extract the information-rich features for
data augmentation methods to generate different views and
in-depth analysis and decision support.
focuses on maximizing the similarity of views from the same
Multivariate time series classification (MTSC), which
sample and minimizing the similarity of views from different
focuses on predicting category labels of ordered real-valued
samples. These CL-based models have been demonstrated in
data, can be divided into traditional nondeep learning methods
their ability to comprehensively learn the intrinsic represen-
and advanced deep learning methods. Most traditional methods
tations of unlabeled time series data [23], [24]. However, in
Received 10 September 2024; revised 26 March 2025; accepted certain instances, they lack task-specific guidance, resulting
4 September 2025. Date of publication 24 September 2025; date of current in suboptimal performance when applied directly to specific
version 8 January 2026. (Corresponding author: Ke Li.)
downstream tasks. To overcome this limitation, incorporating
This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval
of all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by the labels from existing datasets is an effective strategy. Super-
Institutional Ethics Committee of Beihang University. vised CL (SCL) uses the label information to optimize decision
The authors are with the School of Aeronautic Science and Engineering,
boundaries at the feature embedding level, enabling more
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: like@buaa.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3607901 accurate temporal pattern recognition in sequence data [18],
2162-237X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 2 =====

ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES CLASSIFICATION BASED ON SUPERVISED CL AND HOMOSCEDASTIC UNCERTAINTY 415
[25]. By explicitly maximizing intraclass compactness and 2) A novel MTL module based on contrastive task uncer-
interclass separability, SCL not only enhances discriminative tainty extends the Bayesian probability model based on task
feature learning but also improves robustness to noisy labels uncertainty to SCL.
and data variations inherent in real-world time series datasets. 3) A comprehensive large-scale real-world gesture dataset
We desire to allow the framework to obtain the ability of on HDI research, consisting of more than 45 000 labeled
robust to noisy time series by using SCL to obtain the sequences.
intrinsic invariant features. Multitask learning (MTL) is a 4) Extensive experiments demonstrate that U-TFSCL
prevalent paradigm for establishing the auxiliary task and achieves SOTA performance on MTSC tasks, outperforming
using the relative information to facilitate the primary task existing methods by an average of 6.7% in classification
[12], [26]. We propose to integrate SCL as an auxiliary accuracy across challenging test settings.
task within the MTL framework to extract invariant temporal The rest of this study is organized as follows. Related works
features. By simultaneously optimizing cross-entropy loss for are briefly reviewed in Section II. In Section III, our U-TFSCL
the primary task and contrastive objectives for the auxiliary and the HDI dataset are introduced in detail. In Section IV, we
task, this approach leverages the complementary strengths of conduct detailed experiments to demonstrate the performance
discriminative and representation learning paradigms. How- of U-TFSCL and evaluate the impact of each component on the
ever, conventional MTL frameworks are inherently constrained overall performance. Finally, Section V concludes this article
by their reliance on strong task correlations and manual and discusses future work.
hyperparameter tuning for auxiliary task weighting, which
limits generalization in real-world scenarios with diverse noise II. RELATED WORKS
distributions.
A. Time–Frequency Domain Fusion for Time Series
Deep learning approaches have demonstrated substantial
Incorporating prior knowledge into models can signifi-
promise for processing complex multivariate time series data
cantly improve feature extraction, enhance generalization, and
in the domain of MTSC. However, challenges remain in
increase robustness to noise [28]. Frequency-domain fea-
improving the invariant representations extraction capability
tures, derived via Fourier transformations, serve as effective
and the cross-domain generalization performance. To address
prior knowledge, providing a global perspective that comple-
these challenges, this study proposes a novel framework
ments time-domain data [24], [26], [29], [30]. The key is
named uncertainty-based time–frequency SCL (U-TFSCL),
to effectively integrate these two domains to leverage their
which systematically integrates SCL with homoscedastic
complementary strengths. One intuitive approach is signal-
uncertainty-based MTL. The proposed framework constructs
level fusion via the short-time Fourier transform (STFT),
a time–frequency dual-domain CL module that optimizes
which transforms time series into 2-D spectrograms, thereby
two complementary objectives: 1) intradomain consistency
incorporating time–frequency information into model inputs
within the time and frequency domains and 2) cross-domain
[31]. Fusion can also occur at the feature level, for example,
discrepancy minimization between the time and frequency
Jin and Chen [32] proposed an end-to-end deep learning
domains. By incorporating instance-level label information
framework that employs time–frequency analysis to extract
into the contrastive objectives, the module balances dis-
features from vibration signals and combine them into input
criminative learning and invariant representation learning;
embeddings for transformers. Furthermore, tight feature align-
it clusters samples from the same class while separating
different classes and enforces invariant feature alignment ment can be achieved by learning the consistency between
time- and frequency-domain features through cross-domain
across time–frequency domains for the same instances. The
CL [29] and by learning the domain independence through
module generates joint time–frequency representations that
intradomain CL [5].
are directly optimized through end-to-end training with
downstream classification tasks, ensuring semantic alignment
between learned features and classification objectives. Fur- B. CL for Time Series
thermore, we adopt the automatic weighting strategy that CL has emerged as a powerful self-supervised framework
balances the loss function by weighting each task according to for learning representations by maximizing similarity between
the homoscedastic uncertainty [27]. This strategy enables the positive pairs and minimizing dissimilarity between nega-
model to adaptively adjust the weight of each task, allocating tive pairs. CL is extensively used in many fields, including
more attention to uncertain and difficult tasks in the training image classification [22], video analysis [33], HAR [34],
process. remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) [35], and time series
To validate the effectiveness of the framework, we con- analysis [18], [23], [24]. Data augmentation is crucial in
duct comprehensive experiments on six benchmark datasets, a CL-based framework; unlike traditional data augmentation
including a newly constructed human–drone interaction (HDI) in computer vision, time series augmentation must consider
dataset containing real-world gesture sequences from 20 par- temporal dependencies. For instance, TCL [36] splits the time
ticipants. The key contributions of this work include the series into nonoverlapping windows and treats each window as
following. an independent view, exploiting the properties of nonstationary
1) A time–frequency domain contrast module based on SCL time series by assuming negative pairs for distant windows and
fully learns the representation of time series through intratime, positive pairs for neighboring windows. The representation
intrafrequency, and time–frequency domain consistency CL. of the input time series is captured by learning invariant
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 3 =====

416 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 37, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
Fig. 1. Overview of U-TFSCL framework.
features within the windows as well as differences between III. PRINCIPLE AND METHOD
the windows. TS-TCC [37] uses two augmentation methods, A. Overview of the Proposed U-TFSCL Framework
strong and weak augmentation, to convert the original series To fully exploit features across the time–frequency domains
into two views and learn robust representations from the in the time series data, we propose the U-TFSCL framework,
augmented views using temporal and contextual contrasting as shown in Fig. 1. This framework comprises a parallel
modules. TS2Vec [38] generates different views by random encoder module operating within both the time and frequency
masking operations on time steps and performs a hierarchical domains, a time–frequency domain SCL (TFSCL) module,
CL strategy over augmented views, which enables robust and an MTL module that balances the loss based on task
representations. Khosla et al. [25] extend the self-supervised uncertainty. These components aim to provide a comprehen-
batch contrastive approach to the fully supervised setting, sive and effective approach for analyzing time series data.
thereby enabling effective utilization of label information. The Specifically, the original time-domain signals are input into the
clusters of points belonging to the same class are pulled U-TFSCL framework, where they are first converted to their
together in embedding space while simultaneously pushing frequency-domain counterparts using a rapid Fourier trans-
apart clusters of samples from different classes. Tripathi et form. These original and transformed signals are then fed to
al. [39] directly use SCL for air writing recognition and parallel branches for time- and frequency-domain processing.
achieve better performance than using cross-entropy loss. Within each branch, advanced data augmentation methods are
The closest work to ours is [18], which proposes a novel employed to generate positive and negative sample pairs. Sub-
framework for universal representation learning of multivariate sequently, these pairs are processed using independent encoder
time series using instance-level and cluster-level SCL, aim- modules. These modules consist of several transformer blocks
ing to capture complex patterns and dependencies for better and extract distinct time- and frequency-domain features from
downstream task performance. However, this approach relies the pairs.
on manually weighted loss combinations requiring domain Subsequently, the extracted features are fed into the TFSCL
expertise for tuning, and its two-stage architecture freezes module, which uses SCL to calculate intradomain and interdo-
the pretrained encoder during downstream tasks, restricting main losses and improve the performance of the classification
joint optimization of cross-entropy and contrastive losses task by using the intradomain and interdomain compari-
while neglecting explicit temporal-frequency consistency son tasks as auxiliary tasks. In this module, the time- and
modeling. Our method addresses these constraints by inte- frequency-domain losses are calculated first. Then, the features
grating adaptive multiloss weighting and instance-level labels that calculate the intradomain loss are projected into a shared
driven explicit temporal-frequency alignment in an end-to-end latent space by separate projection layers. In this space, the
framework. time–frequency domain consistency loss is calculated.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 4 =====

ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES CLASSIFICATION BASED ON SUPERVISED CL AND HOMOSCEDASTIC UNCERTAINTY 417
Fig. 2. Schematic of time–frequency domain data augmentation. (a) Original series in time domain. (b) Original series in frequency domain. (c) Augmented
series in time domain. (d) Augmented series in frequency domain.
After the TFSCL module, the multitask losses are fed into high-frequency components depends on the specificity of the
the MTL module, which introduces a novel task uncertainty- signal. Therefore, this study did not augment a specific fre-
driven weight adjustment strategy. This strategy enables the quency component but randomly perturbed the full frequency
model to balance the learning of task-relevant and cross- band. To simplify the discussion, FFT(xT) is denoted as
i
domain features. This balance ensures that the model not xF,G represents the frequency-domain encoder, and hF and
i F i
only captures task-relevant features but also develops a h˜F are the original and augmented view embeddings in the
i
robust understanding of domain-independent features, thereby frequency domain, respectively. As the difference between the
enhancing the adaptability and performance across a wide original data and its augmented view is generally minimal,
range of time series analysis tasks. it is assumed that the original data and its augmented view
are positive pairs in the time-domain branch, namely, (xT, x˜T),
i i
and in the frequency-domain branch, namely, (xF, x˜F). The
i i
B. Cross Time–Frequency Information Interaction Strategy different samples are negative pairs in the time-domain branch,
For a given input time series sample xT, the random i.e., (xT, xT) and (xT, x˜T), and the frequency-domain branch,
i i j i j
dropout in [24] is used to generate time-domain augmented i.e., (xF, xF) and (xF, x˜F). To facilitate reading and reduce
i j i j
samples x˜T, and the time encoder G is used to map them repetition, in the subsequent content, we use the domain-
i T
to new embeddings, i.e., hT = G (x˜T) and h˜T = G (x˜T). specific superscript D ∈ {T, F}, which includes the time
i T i i T i
Similarly, in the frequency-domain branch, the time series is domain T and the frequency domain F, to introduce the
augmented and projected after the fast Fourier transform (FFT) intradomain concepts.
(cid:93)
operations. i.e., hF = G (FFT(xT)) and h˜F = G (FFT(xT)). In a multiview batch, i ∈ I ≡ {1, . . . , 2N} is denoted as
i F i i F i
Each frequency component in the frequency domain represents the indices of the samples, and the self-supervised contrastive
a corresponding basis function that plays a key role in signal loss is used to maximize the similarity within positive pairs
processing [40], and perturbation augmentations (additions or and minimize the similarity within negative pairs
deletions) to the frequency component may result in signifi-
cant alterations to the time pattern. Therefore, the frequency X X exp (cid:0) hD · h˜D/τ (cid:1)
domain is randomly augmented based on the augmentation LD = L i D = − log P exp i (cid:0) hD i · hD/τ (cid:1) (1)
methods in [29]. i∈I i∈I a∈A(i) i a
Fig. 2 illustrates the visualization results of time and
frequency-domain augmentation for a time series sample. where · symbol denotes the dot product and hD and h˜D
i i
Zhang et al. [29] showed that in physiological signal data, are the original and augmented views of domain-specific
the performance of perturbing low-frequency components was embeddings, respectively. τ is the temperature parameter to
slightly better than that of perturbing the full frequency band. scale the sensitivity of the loss function; A(i) ≡ I{i} denotes
Conversely, the opposite result was observed for mechanical the set of negative samples to be computed for the ith sample
vibration signals. This implies that the selection of low- and (ith sample is called the anchor in CL), which contains 2(N−1)
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 5 =====

418 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 37, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
negative samples; and in this loss, each anchor corresponds to In batch I, which contains 2N samples, i ∈ I¯ ≡ {1, . . . , N}
one positive pair and 2(N − 1) negative pairs. and i ∈ I˜ ≡ {1, . . . , N} denote the indices of the nonaugmented
We use the method in [25] to extend the self-supervised and augmented views, respectively. To ensure consistency with
contrastive loss to a supervised setting. In SCL, the class of the loss functions in the time and frequency domains, i.e.,
samples in the multiview batch is known, all samples that LT and LF , the vector inner product is used to calculate
sup sup
belong to the same class as the positive samples of the anchor, the distances dTF and d˜TF for both embeddings. The time-
i i
and the label information is used to extend the positive pairs. domain embeddings zT and z˜T are considered as anchors. The
i i
The extended loss function is as follows: indexed set of all frequency-domain positive samples with the
same label as the anchor i in the nonaugmented view in that
X
LD = LD batch is defined as P¯(i) ≡ {p ∈ A¯(i) : yF = yT}. Similarly,
sup sup,i p i
i∈I the index set of all frequency-domain positive samples in the
= − X |P 1 (i) | X log P exp e (cid:0) x h p i D (cid:0) · h h D D p / · τ h (cid:1) D/τ (cid:1) (2) a b u a g tc m h e i n s te g d iv v e i n ew by th P˜ a ( t i) ha ≡ ve {p th ∈ e A s ¯ a (i m ) e : y˜ la F p be = l y˜ a T i s }. an T c h h e or no i t i a n tio th n e s
i∈I p∈P(i) a∈A(i) i a A¯(i) ≡ I¯ and A˜(i) ≡ I˜ are used to denote the set of negative
samples corresponding to the original and augmented view
where P(i) ≡ {p ∈ A(i)} is the index set of all the positive
anchors, respectively. Each set contains N−1 negative samples.
samples in the batch with the same label as anchor i and |P(i)|
Minimizing the loss function LTF helps train the projection
is the cardinality of the index set, which is used to normalize sup
layers P to learn how to align samples of the same class in the
the loss of different anchors. The label and similarity between D
time–frequency domain using the inner product as a measure
pairs of samples are used to pull in the positive pairs and push
of similarity between samples. This process allows the time-
out the negative pairs, which effectively improves the learning
domain embedding zT and frequency-domain embedding zF to
of the embedding hD by the domain-specific encoder G . i i
i D be aligned. The embeddings are then concatenated as inputs
In this study, an approach similar to that in [41] is used,
to the classification module, i.e., zcat = Concat(zT, zF), and
in which text and image modalities are projected into a i i i
subsequently passed through an MLP layer with softmax
common latent space through a linear projection layer. This
activation to calculate the model prediction distributions. The
approach is extended to time- and frequency-domain data.
model prediction distributions are then measured using cross-
These two domains are regarded as distinct modalities and
entropy loss, which is used to quantify the difference between
projected into a shared time–frequency domain latent space
the model-predicted probability distribution, denoted by yˆ , and
through a multilayer perceptron (MLP) projection layer. In i
the probability distribution of the real labels y
this space, the respective modal representations are combined i
to promote mutual understanding and integration. Although the 1 X X n
time- and frequency-domains represent different perspectives L pre = − I yˆ ij logy ij . (4)
of the original input series and can be transformed into each i∈I j=1
other by FFT and inverse FFT (IFFT), such transformations do A composite hybrid loss function is defined as L ,
total
not always directly reveal deeper connections between the two which consists of four parts: two domain-specific supervised
domains. Learning the relationship between these two different contrastive loss LD , which focuses on the alignment of time-
sup
domains in a shared latent space not only captures the intrinsic domain features and frequency-domain features, respectively;
structure of the data but also provides an inductive bias to the a time–frequency consistency-based loss LTF , which promotes
sup
model. This inductive bias helps improve the ability of the the consistency of time- and frequency-domain features and
model to generalize new data, allowing it to be more flexible accurately reflects the intrinsic connections between the two
and accurate in its predictions and analysis when dealing with domains; and a model prediction-based loss L , which mea-
pre
unknown time series data. sures the difference between the predicted probabilities and
Specifically, the domain-specific projectors P D ∈ {P T , P F } the actual labels. The weighted sum of these four loss parts
are used to project the embeddings obtained in each branch constitutes the total loss function of the model
into the shared latent space to obtain new embeddings, i.e.,
zT i = P T (hT i ) and z˜T i = P T (h˜T i ), and z i F = P F (h i F) and z˜ i F = L total = X (cid:0) λ D L s D up (cid:1) + λ TF LT su F p + λ pre L pre (5)
P (h˜F ). Then, the supervised contrastive loss LTF is used to
F i sup where parameters λ , λ , and λ are used to balance the
D TF pre
constrain the distance between the time- and frequency-domain
contribution of each part of the loss to the total loss. This
embeddings
enables the model to be balanced and optimized in multiple
X X dimensions during the training process. The selection of these
LTF = LTF + LTfF
sup sup,i sup,i parameters plays a critical role in determining the final per-
i∈I¯ i∈I˜ formance of the model and affects the sensitivity and bias of
= − X 1 X log exp (cid:0) zT i ·zF p /τ (cid:1) the model in handling tasks.
|P¯ (i) | P exp (cid:0) zT · zF/τ (cid:1)
i∈I¯ p∈P¯(i) a∈A¯(i) i a
− X |P˜ 1 (i) | X log P exp e (cid:0) x z˜ p T i · (cid:0) z˜ z˜ F p T / · τ z˜ (cid:1) F/τ (cid:1) . (3) C. W M h T e L n B co a n s s e t d ru o c n tin H g o t m he os t c o e t d al as lo ti s c s U fu n n c c e t r i t o a n in L ty total , it is neces-
i∈I˜ p∈P˜(i) a∈A˜(i) i a sary to consider several parameters that require careful tuning.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 6 =====

ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES CLASSIFICATION BASED ON SUPERVISED CL AND HOMOSCEDASTIC UNCERTAINTY 419
The optimal setting of these parameters is critical for the will reduce the contribution of L(W), while a smaller σ will
model’s performance. However, traditional methods of param- increase its contribution. Furthermore, if σ is too large, the
eter tuning, such as those relying on experience, intuition, objective will be penalized log(σ) as a constraint.
or complex grid searches, are often difficult and expensive, In (2) and (3), the intradomain contrastive loss LD and
sup,i
making it difficult to find an optimal global solution. To the time–frequency consistency-based loss LTF have a sim-
sup,i
address this problem, we propose a novel uncertainty-based ilar structure to the probabilistic models in softmax, which
approach. L is treated as a collection of different tasks motivates a new approach to optimize these losses. He et
total
with different but competing goals, and the uncertainty of these al. [42] explained the contrastive loss (InfoNCE loss) as a
tasks is used to automatically learn how to assign weights to type of cross-entropy loss and considered the process of
them. pulling positive sample pairs closer and negative sample pairs
In Bayesian modeling, two main types of uncertainty can be farther away in CL as a classification task. This concept
modeled: epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty. Epistemic uncer- provides a new perspective for optimizing contrastive loss
tainty reflects the model’s own uncertainty of the data, whereas using probabilistic models. Probabilistic models are used with
aleatoric uncertainty describes the inherent noise and variabil- an observation noise σ to transform the optimization of LD
sup,i
ity in the data. In the multitask setting, two aspects of aleatoric and LTF into classification task losses
sup,i
uncertainty are explored: heteroscedastic (data-dependent) and
homoscedastic uncertainty (task-dependent). Homoscedastic
uncertainty highlights the confidence levels across differ- LD = − 1 X log exp (cid:0) h i D·hD p /τ (cid:1)
ent tasks, reflecting the inherent uncertainty associated with sup,i |P (i) | P exp (cid:0) hD · hD/τ (cid:1)
p∈P(i) a∈A(i) i a
regression or classification tasks [27]. Understanding this form (cid:18) (cid:19)
1 X 1
of uncertainty is critical to capturing the intricate connections ≈ L (W) + log (σ )
|P (i) | σ2 p,i D
between tasks and their respective roles in the learning process p∈P(i) D
of a model. Therefore, homoscedastic uncertainty was used to 1
evaluate the importance of different losses in MTL. ≈ σ2 L D,i + log (σ D ) (7)
use S s pe S c C ifi L ca b l a l s y e , d a on m m ul a ti x ta im sk izi l n o g ss th f e un G c a ti u o s n sia w n a l s ike d l e ih ri o v o e d d w th it a h t LTF = − D 1 X log exp (cid:0) zT i · zF p /τ (cid:1)
homoscedastic uncertainty. For ease of interpretation, this sup,i |P¯ (i) | p∈P¯(i) P a∈A¯(i) exp (cid:0) zT i · z a F/τ (cid:1)
o se f c a tio n n et u w s o e r s k th w e ith sa i m np e u n t o x ta a ti n o d n w as eig in ht [ s 2 W 7]. . F f o W r i c s la t s h s e ifi o c u at t i p o u n t − 1 X log exp (cid:0) z˜T i ·z˜F p /τ (cid:1)
tasks, the softmax function is used to compress the model |P˜ (i) | p∈P˜(i) P a∈A˜(i) exp (cid:0) z˜T i ·z˜ a F/τ (cid:1)
output and sample from the output probabilities, and the (cid:18) (cid:19)
1 X 1
following probabilistic model of the classification task is ≈ L (W) + log (σ )
defined with the observation noise σ: p(y = c | fW(x), σ) = |P¯ (i) | p∈P(i) σ2 TF p,i TF
Softmax((1/σ2)fW(x)). This can be extended to the case 1 X (cid:18) 1 (cid:19)
of multiclassification tasks with multiple model outputs: + |P˜ (i) | σ2 L p,i (W) + log (σ TF )
p(y | fW) = p(y | fW(x)) . . . p(y | fW(x)). Here, y , . . . , y p∈P˜(i) TF
1 k 1 k
denote the multiple distinct outputs of the model; thus, we can 1
≈ L + log (σ ) (8)
obtain the loss function of the multioutput model L(W, σ
1
, σ
2
), σ2
TF
TF,i TF
by the following log likelihood of the multitask:
L (W, σ 1 , σ 2 ) where L D and L TF represent the supervised contrastive
= −log (cid:0) p (cid:0) y , y = c | fW (x) , σ (cid:1)(cid:1) loss in the intradomain and in the time–frequency domain,
1 2 respectively. When σ , σ →1, the simplifying assump-
= −log (cid:0) p (cid:0) y 1 = c | fW (x) , σ 1 (cid:1)(cid:1) − log (cid:0) p (cid:0) y 2 = c | fW (x) , σ 2 (cid:1)(cid:1) tion of the last tran 1 sitio 2 n in (6) becomes an equal-
(cid:18) (cid:18) 1 (cid:19)(cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:18) 1 (cid:19)(cid:19) ity. When the batch size N of dataset I is suffi-
= −log Softmax fW (x) −log Softmax fW (x)
σ2 σ2 ciently large, the summation over negative samples can be
1 (cid:16) 2 (cid:17) approximated as: P exp(hD·hD/τ) → exp(hD · hD/τ) +
= 1 L (W) + 1 L (W) + log P(cid:48) c exp σ 1 2 1 f c W (cid:48) (x) P a∈A(i) exp(h i D · h a D/τ) a . ∈ T A( h i) is trans i for a mation conve i rts th p e prob-
σ2 1 1 σ2 2 2 (cid:0)P c(cid:48) exp (cid:0) f c W (cid:48) (x) (cid:1)(cid:1) σ 1 2 1 l e e n m tro i p n y to los a s. s A ta d n d d i a ti r o d na b l i l n y a , r w y it c h la s s u s ffi ifi c c i a e t n i t o l n y l t a a r s g k e b u a s t i c n h g si c z r e os N s- ,
(cid:16) (cid:17)
P c(cid:48) exp σ 1 2 f c W (cid:48) (x) we can assume that the probability contributions exp(h i D·hD p /τ)
+ log 2 for each positive sample p in P(i) are approximately equal.
(cid:0)P(cid:48) c exp (cid:0) f c W (cid:48) (x) (cid:1)(cid:1) σ 1 2 2 By making appropriate simplifications and explicit assump-
tions regarding these losses, the optimization objective is
1 1
≈ σ2 L 1 (W) + σ2 L 2 (W) + log (σ 1 ) + log (σ 2 ) (6) simplified while maintaining the consistency and stability of
1 2 the loss function results. These loss functions are not only
where L (W) = −log(softmax(y , fW(x))) and L (W) = smoothly differentiable but also structured to ensure that the
1 1 2
−log(softmax(y , fW(x))) denote the cross-entropy losses of task weights do not converge to zero during the optimization
2
y and y , respectively, and the noise σ is considered as the process, which ensures that the model balances the importance
1 2
learnable relative weights of different output losses. A larger σ of individual tasks during training. Thus, the total loss function
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 7 =====

420 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 37, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
TABLE I
DETAILS OF THE HDI DATASET
Fig. 3. Schematic of gesture movements: (G1) move left, (G2) move right,
(G3) hover, (G4) move up, (G5) move down, and (G6) move forward.
1) using zero-crossing detection to automatically segment
can be rewritten as
gestures and nongestural signals in recorded signals and
(cid:18) (cid:19)
L = X 1 L +log (σ ) + 1 L 2) manually examining the results of the automatic label-
total σ2 D D σ2 TF ing and eliminating the misclassified signal segments that
D TF
1 (cid:0) (cid:1) oscillated up and down around smaller mean values, which
+ log (σ ) + L + log σ (9)
TF σ2 pre pre were inferred to be either preparatory movements or hand
pre
rebound oscillations after the rapid execution of a gesture.
where σ , σ , and σ denote the homoscedastic uncertain-
D TF pre After eliminating invalid signal segments, we obtained 3318
ties of L , L , and L , respectively. The larger value of
D TF pre gesture instances. For each instance, a lookback window with
σ indicates that the task is more uncertain and it is harder to
a length of 20 sample points and a stride of ten sample points
optimize the total loss function L , and the importance of the
total was used to generate samples; after the lookback window
task in the total loss function decreases and has a lower weight.
operation, the valid gesture dataset contains 45 376 samples.
Conversely, a smaller σ indicates that the task is simpler and
Table I shows the details of each gesture; it is clear that
will have a higher weight value in L . To avoid division
total the duration time (average in 0.94 ± 0.34 s) and the length of
by zero and to make the values more stable during learning,
each sample are all shorter than the previous gesture dataset
s: = log(σ2) is substituted into (9), thus giving the final loss
[45], which results in reduced intersample variability, thereby
function L , where s , s , and s are in the optimization
total D TF pre decreasing the model’s ability to sufficiently capture dynamic
set of learnable parameters
patterns or periodic features, ultimately significantly affecting
(cid:18) (cid:19)
L = X 1 L + s D + 1 L + s TF the performance of MTSC tasks. In addition, compared to
total esD T 2 esTF TF 2 traditional MTSC datasets such as UEA [46] (mostly less than
1 s 10 000 samples), our HDI dataset provides more than 45 000
+ L + pre (D ∈ T, F) . (10)
espre pre 2 samples, addressing the critical data scarcity in MTSC. This
scale enables robust training of deep neural networks while
D. Development and Features of the HDI Gesture Dataset reducing the risk of overfitting, making it more suitable for
the training and evaluation of deep learning networks.
To complement the existing MTSC dataset, based on previ-
ous gesture HDI studies [43], [44], we designed six gestures
for a challenging gesture-based HDI task: (G1) Move Left, IV. EXPERIMENT
(G2) Move Right, (G3) Hover, (G4) Move Up, (G5) Move
A. Experimental Settings
Down, and (G6) Move Forward; Fig. 3 illustrates the move-
ment of each gesture. In this task, participants were required The superiority of the framework is validated across exten-
to control drone flight trajectories through six predefined hand sive and widely used MTSC datasets in various domains.
gestures while wearing an inertial measurement unit (IMU) The programs are written in Python 3.8 using PyTorch and
sensor on their dominant hand. All participants started the executed on NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090Ti GPUs. Two
experiment without prior training on the target gestures to layers of transformer blocks are used as encoders in both
preserve interindividual variability. time and frequency domains. For time-domain augmentation,
We obtained data from 20 participants (14 males and six the dropout ratio is set to 0.1, and for frequency-domain
females) to construct the gesture dataset; the participants have augmentation, the perturbation ratio is set to 0.1. Additionally,
an average age of 22.6 (±2.9) and mostly had backgrounds the temperature parameter τ in the TFSCL module is set to
in computer science. All participants are right-handed. Partic- 0.07.
ipants repeated each gesture approximately 30 times after a The Adam optimizer was employed with a learning rate of
3-s preparation period for each gesture. Recorded six-channel 1e−4, weight decay of 3e−4, β1 = 0.9, and β2 = 0.99. Given
signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) during executions are the difference in the dataset sizes, a batch size of 64 is applied
transmitted at 200 Hz via Bluetooth low energy (BLE) to a after the pre-experiment. The data are split into 60%, 20%, and
ground station. 20% portions for training, validation, and testing, respectively.
In order to improve the efficiency of labeling and to To ensure robustness, the experiments are repeated five times
obtain more high-quality labeled data, we adopted a semi- with five different random seeds, and the results are reported
automatic data labeling method that consisted of two phases: based on the averages and standard deviations over these runs.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 8 =====

ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES CLASSIFICATION BASED ON SUPERVISED CL AND HOMOSCEDASTIC UNCERTAINTY 421
TABLE II writing, HAR represents human activity recognition, and G
DETAILS OF THE SIX DATASETS represents gesture.
C. Experimental Results of the U-TFSCL Framework
In the experiments, a testing method with two test datasets
is used: the standard setting and the leave-one-subject-out
(LOSO) setting. In the standard setting, the test dataset con-
tains subjects who are already included in the training dataset.
Conversely, in the LOSO setup, the test dataset consists of
subjects excluded during the training process. This setting
enables the comprehensive evaluation of the generalization
The model is optimized over 100 training epochs. Reported capability of the model. The LOSO experiment is valuable for
numbers are expressed in percentage values for better reading. evaluating the ability of the model to predict the results of data
not used in the training process. By gradually excluding each
subject, the experiment ensured that the model performance
B. Dataset
was reliable and robust across a range of dataset subsets.
In this study, the performance of the proposed U-TFSCL is
Table III shows the model performances under the two test
evaluated across multiple MTSC datasets in different domains,
setups. Due to the limitations of the HAR dataset, which does
including gesture recognition, air writing recognition, and
not allow subject-based division owing to the mixing of all
HAR. Furthermore, we create a user-defined dataset, compris-
participants’ data, LOSO experiments cannot be conducted
ing six upper body gestures, to evaluate the performance of
on these datasets. Consequently, in Table III, “-” is used
the framework in real-world scenarios. This approach ensures
to indicate the absence of the experimental results for this
the extensive evaluation of the capabilities of the framework
scenario. Despite these limitations, the experimental results
across different applications and environments.
provide valuable insights into the performance of the proposed
1) Air Writing-A: The dataset contains 21 450 6-D samples U-TFSCL under different test settings.
from 26 English uppercase letters, acceleration, and gyroscope
Under the standard setting, U-TFSCL achieved recognition
data collected at a frequency of 62 Hz from a Microsoft band
accuracy rates of over 95% for all six datasets. On average, the
worn on the dominant hand of the user [47].
framework exhibited an impressive accuracy rate of 96.5%.
2) Air Writing-B: The dataset contains 5200 6-D samples These results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
of 26 English uppercase letters, and the signals are recorded
framework under typical scenarios. When considering the
at a sampling rate of 200 Hz and downsampled to 62 Hz [39].
LOSO setting, which simulates real-world applications, the
3) HAR-A: The dataset contains 10 299 9-D samples of
framework maintained a high level of performance, with an
six daily activities, including standing, sitting, walking, walk-
average accuracy rate of 79.8%. This finding demonstrates the
ing downstairs, walking upstairs, and lying down. Data are
robustness of the framework in dealing with novel data and its
collected from the IMUs in the smartphone [48].
strong generalization capabilities. U-TFSCL is not only adept
4) HAR-B: The dataset contains 11 771 activities per-
at using existing knowledge from the training data but is also
formed by 30 subjects, mostly female, between the ages of 18
capable of adapting to and performing well on new data, which
and 60. Activities are categorized into 17 fine-grained classes
shows the potential of the framework for practical applications
within two categories: nine activities of daily living and eight
in real-world scenarios.
types of falls [49].
5) Gesture-A: The dataset contains 12 different gesture
D. Ablation Experiment
categories, five of which are static (e.g., wave-in and wave-
out) and six are dynamic (e.g., up and down, and left and In this section, the importance of various components of
right movements). Additionally, one gesture in a relaxed state U-TFSCL is evaluated through a series of ablation studies.
is included. Data are collected from 85 users using armband Different model variants were constructed by adjusting and
electromyogram (EMG) sensors and IMUs [45]. removing key modules, and then, a detailed comparative
6) Gesture-B (Ours): Based on typical HDI tasks, six analysis was performed.
interactive gestures are designed and data are collected from Initially, the model was simplified by removing the MTL
20 participants (14 males and six females) to construct a module while retaining the TFSCL module. This step allows
dataset of these gestures. The participants were asked to repeat the independent evaluation of the performance of the TFSCL
each gesture set 30 times based on the gesture collection. Dur- module. By gradually adding contrastive task losses, their
ing each experiment, the output signals from the accelerometer impact on the overall framework performance is discussed
and gyroscope of the IMUs were recorded at a sampling rate in depth. Subsequently, the potential of the MTL modules is
of 200 Hz. This resulted in a final dataset containing 45 376 discussed. The complete TFSCL module was added and the
gesture samples. weights of different contrastive tasks within the MTL module
Table II shows the details of the datasets used in the were adjusted. Through this process, we can evaluate the
experiment, including the sampling rates, dataset size, data impact of the weights for different tasks on the performance,
sample length, number of data channels, class numbers, and thereby optimizing them to adapt better to MTL environments.
number of participants in the dataset. AW represents air The final part of the ablation studies mainly explored the
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 9 =====

422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 37, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
TABLE III
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF THE U-TFSCL FRAMEWORK
TABLE IV
ABLATION STUDY RESULTS FOR FEATURE FUSION IN THE TFSCL MODULE
impact of instance-level labels on model performance. To frequency-domain contrastive loss, and their combination,
this end, we separately increased the number of labels and respectively. In this loss fusion strategy, the projection layer is
increased the maximum number of positive pairs of the anchor removed from the TFSCL, allowing the features derived from
in the TFSCL module. Furthermore, the impact of different the domain-specific supervision contrastive loss to be concate-
data augmentation ratios and strategies on performance was nated into new features. The features are further processed
discussed. through a fully connected layer to obtain the final prediction
1) Ablation Experiments of the TFSCL Module: In this probabilities. By contrast, LT + LF + LTF indicates the
sup sup sup
section of the ablation study, a strategy was adopted in which use of a full TFSCL module. The final loss of the model is
the loss weights for different tasks are manually set to be composed of contrastive losses computed within the module
equalized based on the assumption that all tasks are equally and the cross-entropy loss based on the output features of
important to the model during the learning process. The the module. The experiments are conducted using the AW-B
purpose of this strategy is to eliminate any potential effects dataset.
of the MTL module, thereby allowing a clearer evaluation of Table IV shows the impact of different feature fusion
the contribution of each component to the performance of the strategies and combinations of loss functions on the model per-
model. formance. Specifically, within the SCL loss fusion strategies,
We compare the performance of the model with and without the combination of the time-domain loss LT and frequency-
sup
the TFSCL module. Without the TFSCL module, the original domain loss LT outperforms the use of either loss function in
sup
model is simplified into two independent submodels, each isolation. This finding suggests that the time- and frequency-
of which processes the time- and frequency-domain features. domain features are complementary and collectively enhance
The outputs of these submodels are then integrated using the predictive capabilities of the model. The strategy using
specific fusion strategies. Three common fusion strategies are LT + LF was then compared with the fusion strategy
sup sup
investigated: sum, maximum, and concatenation. within the cross-entropy loss function. The results indicate
When using the TFSCL module, LT , LF , and LT +LF a better performance for the former approach, which under-
sup sup sup sup
represent the use of only the time-domain contrastive loss, scores the importance of CL in a time series, highlighting
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 10 =====

ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES CLASSIFICATION BASED ON SUPERVISED CL AND HOMOSCEDASTIC UNCERTAINTY 423
TABLE V
ABLATION STUDY RESULTS FOR THE MULTITASK LOSS FUSION IN THE MTL MODULE
its ability to capture and learn generalizable representations overall performance and demonstrating its effectiveness across
of time series more effectively. Furthermore, the performance multiple datasets.
of the full TFSCL module is evaluated, which includes the Specifically, in two experiments with different test settings
time–frequency domain consistency loss. Among the seven on the AW-B dataset, the uncertainty-based weight assignment
fusion strategies, the full TFSCL module achieves the highest strategy resulted in an average performance improvement of
scores. approximately 0.5%, a result similar to that in [50], which
Notably, these results are obtained when all the contrastive used a regression task as an auxiliary task to the classification
task weights are equal. Although the potential competitive task with weight assignment based on the respective uncertain-
relationships between these tasks remain to be determined, ties, compared with a single-task setup, which improved the
achieving the highest performance with such a straightforward classification performance by 0.6% compared with a single-
setup indicates that CL within the shared time–frequency task setup. Although the improvement is limited, this strategy
domain can effectively extract more universal representations remains an effective solution for automatically determining
from the series, thereby positively influencing downstream the optimal parameters for multiple tasks. In addition, the
classification tasks. experimental results reveal the specific effects of different
2) Ablation Experiments of the MTL Module: The full weight assignments on the model performance, which provides
MTL module contains four tasks: the time-domain CL L , valuable insights for further optimization of the model. When
T
the frequency-domain CL L , the time–frequency consistency the weight assignment is biased to the time–frequency consis-
F
CL L , and supervised classification L . To simplify the tency comparison learning, the model demonstrates enhanced
TF pre
capability in capturing cross-domain features, which con-
experimental design in this section, the following strategy
tributes to an improved understanding and generalization of the
is adopted; when manually setting the weights, the time-
relationship across domains. Furthermore, if the weights are
and frequency-domain contrastive losses are merged into the
biased toward the primary classification task, the classification
intradomain contrastive loss and assigned equal weights. When
performance of the model improves slightly. For example,
using the uncertainty-based weighting strategy (i.e., the full
the model performance under the (0.1, 0.1, 0.8) strategy in
MTL module), the weights of each of the four tasks are
the AW-B dataset is superior to that under the (0.8, 0.1,
calculated separately. This design allows clear observations
of how different task weights affected the performance. 0.1) strategy because more weights are assigned to directly
Four sets of different weight settings are manually derived to related tasks. Although manually set weights may result in
discuss the potential impact of different tasks on performance. superior performance in certain scenarios, they are typically
not as effective as dynamic weight assignment strategies
In addition to a setting in which all tasks are equally weighted,
based on task uncertainty, which provide greater flexibility
the other three settings emphasize specific tasks: a weight
and adaptability in automatic adjustments to optimize model
distribution of (0.8, 0.1, 0.1), for the importance of CL in both
performance.
the time- and frequency-domains; a weight distribution of (0.1,
0.8, 0.1), for the role of cross-domain consistency CL; and a 3) Effect of Labels in TFSCL Module: To investigate the
weight distribution of (0.1, 0.1, 0.8), for directly improving impact of labels on model performance, we generated the
the classification performance of the model. Experiments are contrastive mask by limiting the percentage of labels involved
also conducted on the AW-B dataset. in the calculation of LT , LF , and LTF for each batch and set
sup sup sup
Table V presents the results of the ablation studies on the up five different label percentages: 0%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and
MTL module. The uncertainty-based weight assignment strat- 100%. When the percentage is set to 0%, the contrast methods
egy exhibited the best performance. This may be attributed to degrade to SimCLR [22], and when the percentage is set to
the process of dynamically adjusting the weights for each task 100%, it becomes the standard SCL [25].
and aligning them with the specific attributes of the dataset. Fig. 4(a) illustrates the generation of the matrix M ∈
c
This strategy ensures that the model adapts its focus based on {0, 1}L×L, which is used as the mask to calculate the total
the inherent uncertainties within each task, thereby improving distance within the positive pairs in the batch. Specifically,
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 11 =====

424 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 37, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
TABLE VI
EFFECT OF DIVERSE AUGMENTATION STRATEGIES
Fig. 4. Effect of the number of labels on performance. (a) Generate mask Mc
by limiting the number of labels involved in the loss calculation. (b) Accuracy
as a function of the percentage of labels. Standard and LOSO mean two test
methods. Red markers represent the best accuracy. Standard and LOSO mean
two test methods.
4) Effect of the Data Augmentation: In this section, we
compared the effects of different augmentation strategies on
model performance, including different data augmentation
methods and augmentation ratios. Specifically, we increased
the augmentation ratios in our augmentation method (i.e.,
random dropout in the time domain and random perturbation
in the full frequency band) of the original manuscript from
0.05 to 0.2. Additionally, we compared three commonly used
time series augmentation strategies [51], and the settings
of these strategies were kept consistent with those in the
original article. Considering that all these strategies performed
augmentation in the time domain and were not specifically
Fig. 5. Effect of maximum number of positive pairs per anchor on perfor- designed for frequency-domain features, we applied these aug-
mance in AW-B dataset. Red markers represent the best accuracy. Standard mentation strategies to the original time signal xT to generate
and LOSO mean two test methods. the augmented view x˜T. We then generated the fr i equency data
i
and its augmented view xF = FFT(xT), x˜F = FFT(x˜T) through
i i i i
FFT. Subsequently, these data were fed into the domain-
we segment vectors y of original length L and use only the
specific encoder G to generate embeddings and perform the
first α percentage of data y to generate the subsequence y . D
α following calculations.
Then, we compute the matrix M ∈ {0, 1}αL×αL, where each
y Table VI shows the results, and “-” is used to indicate
element indicates whether the corresponding pair of labels in
the setting consistent with the original article. The dropout
y is identical. The block-diagonal matrix M is formed as the
α c strategy with an augmentation ratio of 0.1 achieves the best
direct sum of M and the identity matrix I ∈ {0, 1}(1−α)L×(1−α)L,
y results, while both higher and lower ratios lead to decreased
denoted M = M ⊕ I.
c y performance. Therefore, we adopt for using a dropout ratio
Fig. 4(b) shows the result. For two test settings, the model
of 0.1 in our method. Additionally, the performance of the
performance improves as the percentage of labels increases.
other three data augmentation strategies was lower than that
Among them, the performance improvement is particularly
of dropout, with the Rotation strategy showing a significant
significant when the label percentage is from 0% to 25%, with
performance gap, of over 8%. This is because randomly flip-
increases of 5.4% and 8.9%. The best performance is achieved
ping the channels of the time series data in this augmentation
when all labels are used.
strategy distorts the semantic information and reduces the
To further investigate how the increase of labels in the
quality of the representation.
TFSCL module improves the performance, the maximum
number of positive pairs per anchor is increased from 1 to
unlimited. Here, 1 signifies the inherent augmented view in
E. Contrast Experiments
CL, while unlimited aligns with standard SCL. Fig. 5 shows
the result. When the maximum number is increased from 1 The U-TFSCL framework was thoroughly evaluated and
to 3, the performance is significantly improved in both tests, compared with classical machine learning algorithms and
which is 6.49% and 13.38%. However, when the maximum SOTA deep learning models to demonstrate its exceptional
number is increased further, the performance enhancement is performance. Baselines were implemented following corre-
not readily apparent. This is attributable to the utilization of sponding studies, including KNN, XG Boost, FCN [52],
a batch size of 64, whereas the AW-B dataset encompasses 1D-Resnet [53], Bi-LSTM [54], TSTformer [55], and Con-
as many as 26 classes. Furthermore, the data distribution vTran [56]. To implement these deep learning models, the
is uniform across all classes, without any long-tailed cases. construction designs presented in the original articles are
Consequently, the number of positive pairs in the batch for strictly followed. For hyperparameters presented in their mod-
each anchor is seldom greater than three. els, but not discussed in this study, consistency was maintained
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 12 =====

ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES CLASSIFICATION BASED ON SUPERVISED CL AND HOMOSCEDASTIC UNCERTAINTY 425
TABLE VII
AVERAGE ACCURACY OF DIFFERENT MTSC MODELS OVER SIX MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES DATASETS
with the original papers, while other parameters are adapted
to the settings in this study.
Table VII presents the results of an extensive comparison
of the novel framework with the baselines, emphasizing four
key performance indicators: accuracy, precision, recall, and F1
score. The best results are highlighted in bold and the second-
best results are underlined. The findings show the mean and
standard deviation for multiple training runs; both the KNN
and XG Boost algorithms are deterministic, which precludes
the calculation of standard errors associated with multiple
training runs.
In the standard test setting, U-TFSCL demonstrates excep-
tional performance across multiple datasets, securing five
first-place and one second-place ranking out of six second- Fig. 6. Accuracy as a function of temperature for U-TFSCL in AW-B dataset.
place settings. In terms of quantitative measures, U-TFSCL Standard and LOSO mean two test methods.
outperforms the other transformer-based methods by achieving
an overall improvement of 1.89% in classification accuracy.
the full phase of the action; thus, even samples belonging
In the LOSO test setting, the framework exhibited a more to the same class have a large difference in the time- and
significant advantage, achieving the best results in the three frequency-domain features. This significant difference poses
datasets and surpassing the second-ranked model by 6.5% in
a challenge to the classification capability of the model. In
terms of average accuracy. The outstanding performance of the
addition, using auxiliary tasks to improve the generalization
LOSO experiment demonstrates the exceptional adaptability of
ability of the model may introduce a larger inductive bias
the framework to out-of-distribution data. This demonstrates
into the G-B dataset. This bias may cause the model to have
the effectiveness of the method, which is particularly adept difficulty generalizing the features of the time series, which
at overcoming the inherent challenges of time series classifi- can affect classification accuracy.
cation, particularly in scenarios where data are scarce. These
significant improvements are attributed to carefully designed
F. Hyperparameter Sensitivity
CL tasks, which are designed to deeply learn intrinsically
invariant representations of time series. In previous experiments in this article, all of our results used
While further analyzing the performance of the U-TFSCL a temperature of τ = 0.07. Smaller temperatures benefit train-
framework on different datasets, it is observed that although ing more than higher ones, but extremely low temperatures
the framework showed significant performance advantages are harder to train due to numerical instability [29]. Fig. 6
across the other five datasets, such advantages are less sig- shows the performances of two test methods on the AW-B
nificant on the G-B dataset, both on the standard and on datasets. The model achieves the best performance when the
LOSO settings. This result may be attributed to the unique temperature is 0.07 or 0.1. Compared to the contrastive-based
characteristics of the G-B dataset. Specifically, the G-B dataset methods, whose performance tends to present a reverse-U
is created with a sampling rate of 200 Hz, with each time series shape [57]. The performance of U-TFSCL remains stable
sample consisting of only 20 points. This setting implies that after a rise in temperature in two different test methods.
each sample contains only 0.1 s of action segments. Compared This is because models with a large temperature tend to be
to the complete action with an average time length of 1.3 s, more tolerant of semantically consistent samples, leading to
such a short sample length is clearly insufficient to capture the inability to generate uniformly distributed embeddings,
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 13 =====

426 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 37, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026
whereas, in our framework, this uniformity is guaranteed by [3] F. Moya Rueda, R. Grzeszick, G. A. Fink, S. Feldhorst, and M. Ten
the labels. Hompel, “Convolutional neural networks for human activity recognition
using body-worn sensors,” Informatics, vol. 5, no. 2, p. 26, May 2018,
doi: 10.3390/informatics5020026.
[4] W. Gao, H. Jin, and G. Yang, “Series arc fault diagnosis method
G. Computational Cost Analysis
of photovoltaic arrays based on GASF and improved DCGAN,” Adv.
The computational cost of U-TFSCL was evaluated. The Eng. Informat., vol. 54, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 101809, doi: 10.1016/
j.aei.2022.101809.
U-TFSCL, which includes two transformer blocks in each
[5] Y. He, C. Zhao, and W. Shen, “Cross-domain compound fault diagnosis
domain-specific encoder, has a total of 0.86 million of trainable
of machine-level motors via time–frequency self-contrastive learning,”
parameters. During inference, the GPU memory usage was IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 1–10, Jul. 2024, doi:
11.46 MB, and the throughput reached 1.67 kf/s. After training 10.1109/TII.2024.3384603.
[6] Y. Xu, S. Biswal, S. R. Deshpande, K. O. Maher, and J. Sun, “RAIM:
with the G-B dataset and conducting real-world tests, the
Recurrent attentive and intensive model of multimodal patient monitor-
system’s delay was approximately 0.4 s. This delay includes ing data,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
data preprocessing, BLE data transmission time, and inference Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 2565–2573, doi: 10.1145/3219819.3220051.
[7] H. P. Gupta, H. S. Chudgar, S. Mukherjee, T. Dutta, and K. Sharma,
time. These results demonstrate the potential of the framework
“A continuous hand gestures recognition technique for human-
for practical applications in real-world scenarios. The compu- machine interaction using accelerometer and gyroscope sensors,” IEEE
tations were performed on a machine equipped with an Intel Sensors J., vol. 16, no. 16, pp. 6425–6432, Aug. 2016, doi: 10.1109/
JSEN.2016.2581023.
i7 2.5-GHz CPU and 64 GB of RAM.
[8] Y.-T. Liu, Y.-A. Zhang, and M. Zeng, “Novel algorithm for hand
gesture recognition utilizing a wrist-worn inertial sensor,” IEEE
Sensors J., vol. 18, no. 24, pp. 10085–10095, Dec. 2018, doi: 10.1109/
V. CONCLUSION
JSEN.2018.2873003.
In this study, a novel framework U-TFSCL was proposed [9] T. Perumal, N. Mustapha, R. Mohamed, and F. M. Shiri, “A compre-
hensive overview and comparative analysis on deep learning models,”
with higher classification accuracy to solve the MTSC problem
J. Artif. Intell., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 301–360, 2024, doi: 10.32604/
and construct a real-world gesture dataset of HDIs to evaluate jai.2024.054314.
the proposed framework. [10] Y. Huang, G. G. Yen, and V. S. Tseng, “Snippet policy network v2:
The main contribution of this study is the design of two Knee-guided neuroevolution for multi-lead ECG early classification,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2167–2181,
key modules: the time–frequency contrastive module TFSCL, Feb. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3187741.
which uses time- and frequency-domain SCL as auxiliary [11] S. Mauceri, J. Sweeney, M. Nicolau, and J. McDermott, “Dissimilarity-
tasks; and the MTL module, which is driven by task uncer- preserving representation learning for one-class time series
classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10,
tainty. These modules are rationally organized in the proposed pp. 13951–13962, Oct. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3273503.
framework. After detailed and extensive experiments, the [12] C. Wei, Z. Wang, J. Yuan, X. Wang, H. Liu, and Q. Zhao, “SemiHAR:
following conclusions are drawn. Improving semisupervised human activity recognition via multitask
learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 1,
1) The combination of time- and frequency-domain infor-
pp. 1884–1897, Jan. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3330879.
mation significantly improved the performance of the model. [13] N. Mohammadi Foumani, L. Miller, C. W. Tan, G. I. Webb, G. Forestier,
The results of the ablation experiments on the TFSCL module and M. Salehi, “Deep learning for time series classification and extrinsic
regression: A current survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 9,
show that the model using both types of information signifi-
pp. 1–45, Oct. 2024, doi: 10.1145/3649448.
cantly outperformed the model using only one modality. [14] Y. Zheng, Q. Liu, E. Chen, Y. Ge, and J. L. Zhao, “Exploiting multi-
2) The number of labels used in CL affects the number channels deep convolutional neural networks for multivariate time series
of positive pairs per anchor, which in turn influences the classification,” Frontiers Comput. Sci., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 96–112, Feb.
2016, doi: 10.1007/s11704-015-4478-2.
performance of the model. When using the full set of labels in
[15] A. Ramanathan and J. McDermott, “Fall detection with accelerome-
the TFSCL module, the model achieves optimal performance. ter data using residual networks adapted to multi-variate time series
3) The MTL module dynamically adjusted the task weights classification,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2021,
pp. 1–8, doi: 10.1109/IJCNN52387.2021.9533670.
based on task uncertainty, which not only improved per-
[16] S. Sukhbaatar, J. Bruna, M. Paluri, L. Bourdev, and R. Fergus, “Training
formance but also avoided the cumbersome network search convolutional networks with noisy labels,” 2014, arXiv:1406.2080.
process, thus determining the approximate weight combina- [17] Z. Zhang and M. R. Sabuncu, “Generalized cross entropy loss for train-
tions more efficiently. ing deep neural networks with noisy labels,” 2018, arXiv:1805.07836.
[18] N. Moradinasab et al., “Universal representation learning for multi-
Future work will further explore the applicability of the variate time series using the instance-level and cluster-level supervised
proposed framework to a wide range of real-world time series contrastive learning,” Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 38, no. 3,
pp. 1493–1519, May 2024, doi: 10.1007/s10618-024-01006-1.
classification applications and evaluate its performance in
[19] S. Zhao et al., “Rethinking self-supervised learning for time series
terms of domain adaptation. This framework provides new
forecasting: A temporal perspective,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 305, Dec.
perspectives and more efficient solutions in the field of time 2024, Art. no. 112652, doi: 10.1016/j.knosys.2024.112652.
series analysis. [20] E. Eldele, M. Ragab, Z. Chen, M. Wu, C.-K. Kwoh, and X. Li, “Label-
efficient time series representation learning: A review,” IEEE Trans.
Artif. Intell., vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 6027–6042, Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1109/
REFERENCES TAI.2024.3430236.
[21] K. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised learning for time series analy-
[1] W. Zheng and J. Hu, “Multivariate time series prediction based on sis: Taxonomy, progress, and prospects,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
temporal change information learning method,” IEEE Trans. Neural Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 6775–6794, Oct. 2024, doi: 10.1109/
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 7034–7048, Oct. 2023, doi: TPAMI.2024.3387317.
10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3137178. [22] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple
[2] M. Hou et al., “Stock trend prediction with multi-granularity data: A framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” 2020,
contrastive learning approach with adaptive fusion,” in Proc. 30th ACM arXiv:2002.05709.
Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 700–709, doi: 10.1145/ [23] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
3459637.3482483. contextual contrasting,” 2021, arXiv:2106.14112.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

===== PAGE 14 =====

ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES CLASSIFICATION BASED ON SUPERVISED CL AND HOMOSCEDASTIC UNCERTAINTY 427
[24] L. Yang and S. Hong, “Unsupervised time-series representation learning [47] T. Yanay and E. Shmueli, “Air-writing recognition using smart-bands,”
with iterative bilinear temporal-spectral fusion,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pervas. Mobile Comput., vol. 66, Jul. 2020, Art. no. 101183, doi:
Mach. Learn., Jun. 2022, pp. 25038–25054. 10.1016/j.pmcj.2020.101183.
[25] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. NeurIPS, [48] D. Anguita, A. Ghio, L. Oneto, X. Parra, and J. L. Reyes-Ortiz, “A public
2021, pp. 18661–18673. domain dataset for human activity recognition using smartphones,” in
[26] L. Ren, T. Mo, X. Cheng, and X. Li, “Temporal–frequency attention Proc. ESANN, 2013, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 3–4.
focusing for time series extrinsic regression via auxiliary task,” IEEE [49] D. Micucci, M. Mobilio, and P. Napoletano, “UniMiB SHAR: A
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 15494–15506, dataset for human activity recognition using acceleration data from
Nov. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3287318. smartphones,” Appl. Sci., vol. 7, no. 10, p. 1101, Oct. 2017, doi:
[27] R. Cipolla, Y. Gal, and A. Kendall, “Multi-task learning using uncer-
10.3390/app7101101.
tainty to weigh losses for scene geometry and semantics,” in Proc. [50] T. Gong et al., “A comparison of loss weighting strategies for
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2018, multi task learning in deep neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 7482–7491, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00781. pp. 141627–141632, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2943604.
[28] Y. Wang et al., “Incorporating prior knowledge into self-supervised [51] B. K. Iwana and S. Uchida, “An empirical survey of data augmentation
representation learning for long PHM signal,” Rel. Eng. Syst. Saf., for time series classification with neural networks,” PLoS ONE, vol. 16,
vol. 241, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 109602, doi: 10.1016/j.ress.2023.109602. no. 7, Jul. 2021, Art. no. e0254841, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0254841.
[29] X. Zhang, Z. Zhao, T. Tsiligkaridis, and M. Zitnik, “Self-supervised [52] Z. Wang, W. Yan, and T. Oates, “Time series classification from scratch
contrastive pre-training for time series via time-frequency consistency,” with deep neural networks: A strong baseline,” in Proc. Int. Joint
2022, arXiv:2206.08496. Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), May 2017, pp. 1578–1585, doi: 10.1109/
[30] V. Gorade, A. Singh, and D. Mishra, “Large scale time-series repre- IJCNN.2017.7966039.
sentation learning via simultaneous low- and high-frequency feature [53] H. I. Fawaz, G. Forestier, J. Weber, L. Idoumghar, and P.-A. Mu¨ller,
bootstrapping,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 1, “Deep learning for time series classification: A review,” Data Mining
pp. 991–1002, Jan. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3331506. Knowl. Discovery, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 917–963, Jul. 2019, doi: 10.1007/
[31] X. Zhu, D. Shen, H. Wang, and Y. Hao, “FCNet: Fully complex network s10618-019-00619-1.
for time series forecasting,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 24, [54] V. Kumar and P. R. Muduli, “Attentive Bi-LSTM-based method for noise
pp. 40127–40139, Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3449903. suppression in ambulatory ECG measurements,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–9, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3330182.
[32] C.-C. Jin and X. Chen, “An end-to-end framework combining
[55] G. Zerveas, S. Jayaraman, D. Patel, A. Bhamidipaty, and C. Eickhoff, “A
time–frequency expert knowledge and modified transformer networks
transformer-based framework for multivariate time series representation
for vibration signal classification,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 171, Jun.
2021, Art. no. 114570, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2021.114570. learning,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
Mining, Aug. 2021.
[33] Z. Qi, S. Wang, C. Su, L. Su, Q. Huang, and Q. Tian, “Self-regulated
[56] N. M. Foumani, C. W. Tan, G. I. Webb, and M. Salehi, “Improving posi-
learning for egocentric video activity anticipation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
tion encoding of transformers for multivariate time series classification,”
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 6715–6730, Jun. 2023, doi:
10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059923. Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 22–48, Jan. 2024,
doi: 10.1007/s10618-023-00948-2.
[34] X. Shu, B. Xu, L. Zhang, and J. Tang, “Multi-granularity anchor-
[57] F. Wang and H. Liu, “Understanding the behaviour of contrastive loss,”
contrastive representation learning for semi-supervised skeleton-based
2020, arXiv:2012.09740.
action recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45,
no. 6, pp. 7559–7576, Jun. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3222871.
[35] Z. Sun and X. Li, “Contrast-Phys+: Unsupervised and weakly- Tao Zhang received the B.E. degree in aircraft
supervised video-based remote physiological measurement via spa- control and information engineering from Beihang
tiotemporal contrast,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, University, Beijing, China, in 2023, where he is cur-
no. 8, pp. 5835–5851, Aug. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3367910. rently pursuing the M.Eng. degree with the School
of Aeronautic Science and Engineering.
[36] A. Hyvarinen and H. Morioka, “Unsupervised feature extraction by time-
His research interests include time series analysis,
contrastive learning and nonlinear ICA,” 2016, arXiv:1605.06336.
human–robot interaction, and deep learning.
[37] E. Eldele et al., “Self-supervised contrastive representation learning
for semi-supervised time-series classification,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 15604–15618, Dec. 2023, doi:
10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3308189.
[38] Z. Yue et al., “TS2 Vec: Towards universal representation of time series,”
Ke Li (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
2021, arXiv:2106.10466.
from the Department of Human-Machine and Envi-
[39] A. Tripathi, A. K. Mondal, L. Kumar, and A. P. Prathosh, “SCLAiR:
ronmental Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing,
Supervised contrastive learning for user and device independent airwrit-
China, in 2008.
ing recognition,” IEEE Sensors Lett., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1–4, Feb. 2022,
doi: 10.1109/LSENS.2021.3139473. From 2008 to 2010, he was a Post-Doctoral
Researcher at the Institute of Fluid Mechanics, Bei-
[40] R. Soklaski, M. Yee, and T. Tsiligkaridis, “Fourier-based augmen-
hang University. From 2012 to 2014, he conducted
tations for improved robustness and uncertainty calibration,” 2022,
research as a Visiting Scholar at The Univer-
arXiv:2202.12412.
sity of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
[41] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural
Hill, NC, USA. He is currently a Professor and
language supervision,” in Proc. ICML, 2021, pp. 8748–8763.
the Director of the Experimental Teaching Cen-
[42] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
ter, Beihang University. His research interests include theory and engi-
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
neering of human–machine–environment intelligent systems, data mining,
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
human–machine hybrid intelligent methods, and applications of machine
[43] M. Obaid, F. Kistler, G. Kasparavicˇiu¯te, A. E. Yantac¸, and M. Fjeld, learning.
“How would you gesture navigate a drone?: A user-centered approach
to control a drone,” in Proc. 20th Int. Academic Mindtrek Conf., Oct.
2016, pp. 113–121, doi: 10.1145/2994310.2994348. Shaofan Wang received the B.S. degree in mechan-
[44] M. Seuter, E. R. Macrillante, G. Bauer, and C. Kray, “Running with ical engineering from Shandong University, Jinan,
drones: Desired services and control gestures,” in Proc. 30th Austral. China, in 2015, the M.S. degree in mechanical
Conf. Comput.-Human Interact., Dec. 2018, pp. 384–395, doi: 10.1145/ engineering from Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
3292147.3292156. Karlsruhe, Germany, in 2019, and the Ph.D. degree
[45] J. P. Va´sconez, L. I. Barona Lo´pez, A´ . L. Valdivieso Caraguay, and from the Department of Human-Machine and Envi-
M. E. Benalca´zar, “Hand gesture recognition using EMG-IMU signals ronmental Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing,
and deep Q-networks,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 24, p. 9613, Dec. 2022, China, in 2025.
doi: 10.3390/s22249613. His research interests include applications of
[46] A. Bagnall et al., “The UEA multivariate time series classification deep learning, deep reinforcement learning, and
archive, 2018,” 2018, arXiv:1811.00075. human–robot interaction methods.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Science & Technology of China. Downloaded on July 05,2026 at 10:02:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.